ТНЕ 


VINAYA PITAKAM: 


ока OF 


THE PRINCIPAL BUDDHIST HOLY SCRIPTURES IN 
THE PALI LANGUAGE. 


BDITED BY 


HERMANN OLDENBERG. 


VOL I. 
THE MAHAVAGGA. 


Pusuiegap wits. TRU ÅGSISTANCS or ТИВ Rotat Åcansur ОР Braum 
AND or ТЫВ Sscarrany or Stars FOR Impr їн COUNCIL. 


WILLIAMS AND NORGATE, 
14, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON; 
ахо 20, SOUTH FREDERICK STREET, EDINBURGH. 


1879. 


Tuz ManAvaces, WHICH THE ÉpDIToR DEEMED DESTBABLE 
TO PUBLISH FIRST, IS, 1N INDIA, RECKONED AB THE 


Taran PART or THE WHOLE PrrAxa. 


3,14 for vimuttisukhapatisamvedi read vimuttisukhapatisamvedi 
10,17 for bikkhave read bhikkhave 

14,23 for va read và 

14,25 forme so read m' eso 

14,36 for cittáni read cittáni 

14,37 for honti read honti (defective printing) 

17,35 for labbeyyam read labheyyam 

18,9 for nisidimsu read nisidimsu 

19,27 for pariyogålhadhammå read pariyogålhadhammå 
19,33 106,29 109,25 for bhikkå read bhikkhå 

32,28 for jatilam read jatilam 

36,6  forapekacce read appekacce 

40,34 42,4 for abbhatitam read abbhatitam 

41,17 for bhikku read bhikkhu 

45,34 for upåjjhåyo read upajjhåyo 

47,8 for naháyitükámo read nahåyitukåmo 

51,12 for samghåtiyo read samghåtiyo 

58,10 for bkikkhå read bhikkhå 

59,32 for auujånåmi read anujånåmi 

62,15 65,1 84,2 89,12 117,36 135,8 for bhikkave read bhikkhave 
66,10 for asekhena read asekhena 

67,10 for appassutto read appassuto 

76,17 for nama read nama 

80,38 for bhikkunà read bhikkhunà 

83,12 for bhihkhü read bhikkhü 

85,20 for samannágatam read samannågatam 

90,1 for måtughatakupajjhåyena read måtughåtakupajjhåyena 
100.4 for nissayåm read nissayam (defective printing) 
107,27 for sufiåtu read sunåtu 

112,14 for patimokkhuddeso read påtimokkhuddeso 

115,3 130,25 for bhikkühi read bhikkhühi 

122,35 for vacaniyå read vacaniyå 

129,14 for patimokkhe read pátimokkhe 

129,30 130,1 for agacchanti read ågacchanti 

134,17 for samånasåmvåsakaditthim read samånasamvåsakaditthim 
136,5 for dukkåtassa read dukkatassa (defective printing) 
138,25 158,27 for nå read na 

142,9 149.6 for bhikkünam read bhikkhünam 

144.16 for pucchissámi read pucchissami 

146,3 for sikkhamånåya read sikkhamånåya 

147,31 for sattanam read sattannam 

150,35 for vacanam read vacanam 

151,28 for bkikkhuno read bhikkhuno 

154,31 for pafifiayati read parináyati 

158,30 for såvåkånam read såvakånam 


172,29 for dukkatam read dukkatam 

173,11 for sabrahmacarinam read sabrahmacårinam 
177,31 for samghena read samghena 

180,19 for nisidimsu read nisidimsu 

181,7 for patiganheyya read patiganheyya 

182,21 for gavåghatanan read gavåghåtanan 

182,34 for savarati read saravati 

184,34 for manovififieya read manovififieyyå 

192,6 for gonakam read gonakam 

192,37 193,3 for papupåsakassa read påpupåsakassa 
198,21 for phålit read phålit 

202,9 for patiggahetvå read patiggahetvå 

208,3 for pubbanhasamayam read pubbanhasamayam 
208,19 for tinandupakam read tinandupakam 

218,30 for manussamamsam read manussamamsam 
221,29 for anuppavacchati read anuppavecchati 

221,31 for upåjayati read upajåyati 

231,3 for papatipadá read patipadå 

234,26 235,17 for Gotamo read Gotamo 

237.27 for upasakammi read upasamkami 

238,36 for patipåtim read patipåtim 

245,26 for upasamkami read upasamkami 

247.4 for ågacehati read ågacchati (defective printing) 
251,1 fortan read tañ 

251,30 for mamsan read mamsafi 

266,38 for tini read tini 

271,7 for settibhariyå read setthibhariyå 

302,15 for bkikkhünam read bhikkhünam 

306,4 for vigaralhtvá read vigarahitvå (defective printing) 
320,33 for patikasseya read patikasseyya 

325,20 for ditthin read ditthin 

325,36 for tassapåpiyyasikåkammåråhassa read tassapåpiyyasikåkammårahassa 
333.27 for patisåraniyakammam read patisåraniyakammam 
338,29 for upasamkami read upasamkami 

345.14 for singhátakena read singhátakena 

347.24 for Kåsiråjanam read Kåsiråjånam 


CONTENTS. 


Інтвороспок. pp. O—LYI. 


Tuz Mamivacoa. 
I. Tae Армцпетон то THE ORDER or BHIKKHUS. pp. 1-100. 


1-24. The first events after Gotama’s attaining Buddhahood. 
(1-4. His sojourn near the Bodhi tree.—5. Brahmå 
Sahampati exhorts him to preach the Doctrine.—6. He 
addresses the Paficavaggiya Bhikkhus.—7-10. Story of 
Yasa, his relations and friends.—11. Mara appears unto 
Buddhs.—12. Regulations about the Pabbajjå and Upa- 
sampodá Ordinations.— 13. Mâra again ерреагв. — 14. 
Story of the Bhaddsvaggiy&.—15-20. Conversion of the 
three Kassapas and their Disciples.—21. Buddha pro- 
pounds the Adittapariyéya.—22. Buddha's first mecting 
with King Bimbisåra.—23-24. Conversion of Såriputta 
and Moggallåna.) 


25-27. Different Rules regarding the Duties of Upajjhåya 
and Saddhivihárika.—28-81. Ceremony of Upssampedå. 
— 82-36. The duties of Acariya end Antevüsika.—36-37. 
What Bhikkhus are qualified for being Acariya or Upa- 
jjháys.—38. Admission of those who bad previously 
been attached to another Congregation (afifiatitthiya- 


vr CONTENTS. 


pubba).—39-79. Further Bules regarding the Pabbajja 
and Upasampadå Ordinations. Different classes of those 
who are not to be admitted to the Fraternity. 


II. Тнк Ороватна CEREMONY AND THE РЇттмоккнА. pp.101-136. 


(6-13. Consecration of the Boundaries for a Bhikkhu 
Community.) 


III. Resmesce ровіко TRE Ranry Season (vassa). pp. 137-156. 
IV. Tux Pavinani CEREMONY AT THE END oF Vama. рр. 157-178. 


V. "іғғквкнт Runzs, »sPECLALLY REGARDING THE Uer or 
ÅRTICLES MADE or Sam. pp. 179-198. 


1-8, 12. Shoes and Slippers.—9-11. Different kinds of 
Beats, Vehicles.— 13. Indulgences for the Countries 
bordering on Majjhsdesa (story of Sona Kufikanna). 


VI. Mepicaumnrs. рр. 199-252. 


1-17. Different kinds of Medicamenta. Rules how to pre- 
pare, to use, and to keep them. (15. Story of Pilinda- 
vaccha.)—17-21. Different kinds of Food. How to 
prepare and to keep them.—22. Surgical Operations.— 
23. Story of Suppiyå. Prohibition regarding man's flosh 
and the meat of different animals.—24. Bermon about 
rice gruel (yågu).—25-40. Different Rules about Food; 
how to preparo, to take, and to koep it.—(28. Buddha's 
visit to Páfaliputta.—29. Visit to Kotigime.—30. His 
moeting with Ambapéll and tho Licchavis.—31. Story of 
Blha.—34. Story of Menduka.—35. Story of Keniya.— 
36. Story of Roja.) 


VIL Тнк Karmima CEBEMONIESs. pp. 253-267. 


CONTENTS. VII 


VIII. Dress or Barxxavs. рр. 268-311. 


(1. Story of Jivaka.—15. Story of Visåkhå.—26-27. Rules 
regarding the attendants of sick Bhikkhus.) 


IX. Varoprry ARD LnvaLIDITT or EccLESIASTICAL Acts. pp.312-336. 


X. Вснівмв AMONG THE YRATERNITY. pp. 397-360. 
(2. Story of Dighåru). 


INTRODUCTION. 


In editing the text of the Manivacaa, as the first in- 
stalment of a complete edition of the Pali Vinaya PITAKA, 
it may be well to say something as to the object of the 
undertaking. It is manifestly important that the entire 
text of the Buddhist Holy Writings should be made 
accessible to all who are desirous of acquiring a thorough 
knowledge of one of the most important historical pheno- 
mena of India, namely, Buddhism. There are, however, 
objections to the publication of the complete Tipitaka. 
Every one acquainted with the mode of expression em- 
ployed in the earlier Buddhist works knows with what 
wearisome diffuseness the religious doctrines and ordinances 
are there set forth, how constantly the same thoughts and 
phrases are repeated, and how irritating to European readera 
is the excessive use of synonymous expressions. It may 
well be asked, therefore, whether it would not be sufficient 
to give mere extracts from the text, instead of the 
text iteelf, with all its formality and repetition? Those, 
however, who, being engaged in historical investigation» 
have been obliged to work from mere extracts, will know 
the advantage of being able to refer to the original worka. 
When even those who made the extracts find in them an 
imperfect help, it is not surprising that to others they 
should be still less able to supply the place of the sources 
themselves. Every reader has his own questions to put to 
b 


x VINAYA AND DHAMMA. 


the original text, and will study it from his own particular 
point of view; hence it is impossible that extracte, however 
carefully made, can satisfy the requirements of every reader. 
Buch extracts also, while showing but imperfectly what the 
text contains, show still less what it omits to mention. Bo, 
although many points may be cleared up even by so im- 
perfect an acquaintance with the sources as is afforded by 
extracts, yet to those who wish to be complete masters of 
the subject, and must therefore study the smallest details, 
the publication of the complete text will not be unwelcome. 

Being compelled to relinquish my original intention of 
adding a complete translation of the text, I have thought 
it well to lay before my readers—in the form of an Intro- 
duction—my views as to the origin of the works which I 
have undertaken to edit, and as to their historical position 
in the literature of which they form part. 

Both in the Holy Writings, and also in the earliest 
Buddhist works that we possess, we find the VINAYA sys- 
tematically compared and contrasted with the Drama; 
and indeed, where both are mentioned, Dhamma is frequently 
named first and Vinaya second. This regular system of 
comparison between Dhamma and Vinaya appears through- 
out the sacred literature, which, in the earlier period, con- 
sisted of two large collections of works (Pitaks), of which 
one comprised the Vinaya and the other the Dhamma; and 
at a later period, consisted of three collections, of which 
the first was devoted to the Vinsya and the other two to 
the Dhamma. Of the earlier of these two systems (which 
possessed a Dvrrrraka, but knew nothing of the Tipitaka) 

+ Of the numerous exemples of this, the citation of a few terms frequently 
met with, will suffice: yo... afifiatitthiyepubbo imasmim dhammavinaya 
абай pabbejjem,—eyam dhammo a; vinsyo idam satthu sSeanam,— 

dhammadharo vinaysdharo måtikådharo.— шара says when ames Di the 
Bhikkhus in Råjagaba: dbammaf ca тїпауай ca samgüyáma.— A jurta 


position of Dhamma with Vinaya is met with even in the Påtimokkhs 
(dhammarddt — vinayavadi, Minayeg, Frat; р. 5. line 14). —These passages P 


MR MGR ALES ELE SC CRI NERE каса rs 


THE ANCIENT DVIPITAEA. XI 


we get an admirably clear account from the closing chapter 
of the CuLLAvAGGA, which I propose to edit when I have 
finished the Mahåvagga. This important chapter gives us 
the earliest known account of the first two great Councils 
of the Buddhist Church. We learn from it that in the 
Council of R&jagaha, Kessapa, the President of the As- 
sembly, opened the proceedings for the consecrative settle- 
ment of'the Holy Texts with these words, “ Ye venerable 
men, let the congregation hear me. If the congregation 
is ready, I will question Upåli respecting the Vinaya.” 
‘Whereupon Kassapa questioned Upåli respecting the Vinaya. 
This being done, he addressed a second speech to the as- 
sembly: “ Ye venerable men, let the congregation hear me. 
If the congregation is ready, I will question Ananda about 
the Dhamma.” Whereupon he questioned Ananda respecting 
the five collections (paflca nikåyå), beginning with the 
Brahmsjålamutte. Hereby, according to this account, the 
whole work of the revision of Dhamma and Vinaya ie 
brought to an end. The five Nikåyas are undoubtedly the 
five well-known collections included in the Suttapitaka. 
These five collections therefore—according to the idea of 
the age in which this account of the two Councils originated 
— contained the whole of the Dhamma as taught by 
Buddha. The series of works which was subsequently 
called Suttapitaka was even at that time well known; 
the collection of the Abhidhammapitaka was either al- 
together unknown, or was not regarded as canonical or 
of the same value as the two other Pitakas; and it was 
generally supposed that, in the council held after Buddha's 
death, it had not been admitted by the Theras into the 
collection of the Dhammavinaya or of the Jinavacana.! 

The important difference between the more recent 
Buddhist literature and that of the more ancient period, 


+ This term i» used in the grammar of Касей; . 83, ed. Benart) м 
denoting the whole of Buddha's discourses, Aer › 


XII TRANSITION FROM THE DVIPITAKA TO THE TIPITAKA. 


viz. the transition from the Dvipitaka to the Tipitaka, 
becomes more marked if we compare the above account 
taken from the Cullavagga with an account of the same 
Council given by Buddhaghoss in bis introduction to the 
commentary on the Dighanikáya! The two accounts are 
in most respects similar, but they differ altogether with 
regard to the extent and division of the sacred texta col- 
lected at the first Council. In both we have the report of 
the revision of the Vinsya, and in both, after this is over, 
Kassapa addresses the assembly with the words, “ If the con- 
gregation ie ready, I will question Ananda about the Dhamma.” 
But in the latter account, before the revision of the Dhamma 
is begun, Kassapa puts the following question to the Theras : 
“Which of the two collections (pitaka) shall we proceed 
with first?" and they answer, “The collection of the 
Suttanta.”” This collection, beginning with the Brahmajala, 
is then revised: they then pass on to the second part of 
the Dhamma, namely, the Abhidhamma; and in this manner 
the revision of the Dhammavinaya is brought to a close.* 

It would be out of place here to enter into в discussion as 
to the period to which the more recent Dhamma literature, 


1 Compare Turnour, in the Journal Asiatic Society, of Bengal, vol. vi.p 510, et sg, 

3 A valuable testimony of the earlier existence of a Dvipitake 1s also con- 
tained in the Mabåparinibbånasutta (p. 39): tåni padavyafijanüni sádh 
uggabetvå sutte otdretabbånt vinaye eandametabbani.—In opposition to suc 
тоге proofs, it is of little importance to bring forward ges in the Vinaya 
which seem to speak in favour of the existence of the Abhidhammapitaka, It is 
required of a teacher thet he ahould be able to rwr da papil: abbidhamme 
vinetum abbivinaye vineta (MaAdoegge, I. 36, 12). is, of course, is only 
meant to say that his instruction is to be in that which ins to the Dhamma 
and Vinsya—In the Apri (їп explanation of the 72nd Pácittiya) one 
Вы муз ю apone : inghe tram suttante brå gåtbåyo vå re ve pe 
vi iyápugamm, vioayam pariyapunimsasiti. It seems that an 
Abhidharma аге [е meant to represent the different texts comprised in the 
Khuddakanikaya, Some of these, like the Baddbavames, or the Dhammapada, 
are metrical in form, and may be dasi Саа. Others of these texta, such 
as the Patisambhidá, are similar in character to the Abhidhamma, and have, in 
fact, ss Puddhephoea amerta, been considered by many as belonging to the 
Abhidhamma. far as I know, the only passage in the Vinaya which really pre- 
supposes the exisgence of an Abhidbemmapitaka is one in the Bhikkhuntvibbangs 
ois Pácittiym: suttante oküsam petvå vinayam và adhidhammam và 
pucehati), which words, after all that has otherwise resulted with regard to the 

iority of the Abhidhamma, we can unbesitatingly assume to be an 

interpolation. 


DEFINITION OF VINAYA. XII 


known as the Abhidhamma, belongs; for the. purposes of this 
research it will suffice to state, as indeed we have already 
sean, that from the very earliest times the whole spiritual ` 
teaching of the Master was presented to the Buddhist 
community in а double form, as the Dhamma and Vinaya; 
and this dualism, so to speak, is reflected in the literature, 
in the earliest style of its development, in the two Pitakas. 

The difference between the Dhamma and Vinays cannot 
be very clearly defined, and it would be difficult to lay down 
any very broed line of distinction between the two. Many 
sections of the Vinaya are met with again in the Dhamma, 
and not unfrequently are repeated word for word. This, 
however, is not so much owing to the want of а definite idea 
regarding the different provinces of the two categories, as to 
в certain carelessness displayed in the revision of the texts. 
Many additions were made to the text of the Vinaya, in order 
to explain the origin and the meaning of the different eccle- 
siastical ordinances, and various passages from the Dhamma 
came to be inserted in the Vinayapitaks in this way. It ia 
important therefore, in reading the Vinayapitaka, to avoid 
being mialed by such additions as to what are the chief and 
essential contents of this Pitaka. 

Looking at what is essential in the Vinsyapitaka, we may 
define it as a collection of rules regulating the outward conduct 
of the Samgha and BhikkAus.! It does not therefore deal with 
purely ethical questions, except so far as these affect such 
outward conduct; nor does it deal with outward conduct 
generally, but only with the outward conduct of the Samgha 
and the Bhikkhus? The Dhamma, on the other hand, includes 
башарды unde the uno Авива аа end thin Мыта Vi 
28-30, are almost identical with parts of the Mahåperinibbånasutta. mpare 
also M. Feer's Etudes Bouddhiques, pp. 202-206. 

* No direct mention is made in the Vinaya of Inymen (upåsaka) amociated with 
the Bemgha, except that the rules regulate the conduct of the Bhikkhus towards 


laymen, their jon as U| ete. 
8 The discourse on the duty of benevolence, for instance, falls to the Dhamma 
and not to the Vinaya, since it is not addressed to the Bhikkhas but to leymen. 


XIV VINAYA AND DHAMMA. 


all that the Vinaya omita It treats, therefore, of a great 
variety af subjects, and on this acoount does not, like the 
Vinaya, admit of so short and comprehensive a definition. 
The doctrine regarding release from suffering, which forms 
во central an ides in the ancient Buddhist faith,! belongs to 
the province of the Dhamma. But although the Vinaya, 
according to its strict notion, has not to deal with this 
doctrine, still the religious ordinances there prescribed 
continually recognize and point to its existence. In the 
Dhamma we have an account of the inward process by which 
this release is accomplished, whereas the Vinsya treats only 
of the outward conduct of the life that is still struggling 
towards it. The Vinaya, whioh, as we have sen, ie generally 
considered as co-ordinate with the Dhamma, appears, when 
regarded from this point of view, as a part of the Dhamma : 
and henoe we can understand why it is that, side by side 
with those numerous passages which place the Dhamma and 
Vinaya in direct contrast, we may find, in the Buddhist 
texta, othere, which bring the Vinaya within the province ' 
of the Dhamma.’ ' 
It is probable that the contrast as well as the connexion 
between the two ideas of the Dhamma and Vinaya origi- 
nated in the earliest times of Buddhism—of this, however, 
we have no direct proof; but intrinsic evidence clearly 
points to this fact: and in further support of the same 
view, we may refer to the relation subsisting between the 
Dhamma and Vinaya and the Buddhist Trinity of Buddha, 
Dhamma and Samgha. It is immaterial whether we oon- 


It is mentioned, together with a series of other doctrinal subjects belonging to the 
Dhamma, in an enumeration that is frequently found repeated: dånakathå 
stlakathá, tha, kåmånem ádinavo, okáro, eamkilaso, nekkhamme 

1 In the aliavagga we hare the striking’ remark: ayaq dhammavinayo 
ekaraso vimuttiraso, 

* The Callavaggs relates how Upáli delivered the doctrines of the Vinaya to 
the Bbikkhus; the audience stand while listening to them "dhammagåravens.” 
He who spreads false doctrines concerning the Vinaya is called an adbamma vidi 
(at а, X.5,4). King Asoka, in the inson tion at Bairåt (Corpus Inscr. 
plate xv.), reckons the vinayssamåkåse among the dhammspaliyå åyåni. 


THE ANCIENT CONFESSIONAL MEETINGS. xv 


trast Dhamma and Samghs or Dhamma and Vinaya, sinoe 
Vinaya, as we have already seen, relates only to the 
Samgha. 

It may be objected, perhaps, that this division of Buddha’s 
teaching into two parte presupposes too long a period for 
its development; this objection would perhaps be well 
founded, were it not for the probability that much of the 
preparatory work of Buddhiam had been already done for it 
by the Brahmanical theology, and other seots which pre- 
ceded it. Во that, when the first Buddhist communities 
made their appearance, the outward religious forms for the 
new sect were, to a great extent, already fully developed. 

Having thus far treated of the relation between tho 
Dhamma and Vinaya, we will now proceed to consider 
their development, and in doing во we shall first consider 
the development of the Vinaya. 

The origin of the earliest rules or laws laid down by the 
Buddhist community for the guidance of its members ap- 
pears to have been connected with those assemblies of the 
Bhikkhus which met at full and new moon. The custom 
of holding these meetings seems to be as old as Buddhism 
iteelf, or perhape older, for it may well be that the custom 
was borrowed from some of those earlier sects which pre- 
ceded Buddhism, and upon which it was to some extent 
modelled. At these assemblies the monks of every district 
met together, and those who had committed offences were 
obliged to confess them and submit to the prescribed 
penance. A list of those offences which deserved punish- 
ment or some kind of expiation was, at a very early period, 
drawn up for the use of these confessional meetings. This 
list was read out to the assembled Bhikkhus, and each one 
was asked whether he knew himself to be free from the sins 
there named. This list is called the Pátimokkha, and is 


1 It may be said that the Upanishsda form the Dhamma, and the Kalpasütras, 
Gribyastras, eto., Ше Vinaya of tha Brahmans. É 


XVI THE PÅTIMOKEHA A8 THE FOUNDATION OF THE VINAYA. 


the earliest specimen of Buddhist Vinaya literature that 
we possess, 

The opinion here expressed as to the position of the Påti- 
mokkhs in Buddhist literature is, I am well aware, opposed 
to the views of most Pali scholars. Mr. Rhys Davids! con- 
sidere the Påtimokkha of more recent origin than the works 
which form the great complerus of the Tipitaka, and as- 
sumes that at the time when the latter works were collected, 
the Påtimokkha either did not exist or was of too recent a 
date to be admitted into the holy writings. I will try to 
give my reasons for taking an opposite view. 

Although we do not find the Påtimokkha in its entirety 
and in its original form in the Vinayapitaks, yet all its 
rules and ordinances, separately it may be, but word for 
word the same, are found there; and indeed the whole 
Vibhanga? is nothing more than an extended reading of 
the Pátimokkhe We thus learn the occasion upon which 
each individual ordinance was promulgated by Buddha; 
then follows the ordinance itself; and then an explanation 
or illustration of the several terms employed in it. In some 
casee, also, the rule is further illustrated by a reference to 
cases which come within the rule, and to others which form 
exceptions to it. 

The question is, therefore, whether the ordinances origi- 
nally appeared with the explanatory notes as in the Vibhanga, 
the Pátimokkha being subsequently extracted from it; or 
whether the Pátimokkha alone was the older portion, the 
additional matter of the Vibhanga being the work of a sub- 
sequent revision. 

In dealing with thie question, it should, in the first place, 

! Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon, p. 6; Buddhism, p. 163. 

* Vibhaöga is the collective name for the two closely connected works which 
in the MSS. are called Parajika and Påcittiya. The latter titles are not old and 
may easily lead to mistakes. They are taken from that clam of ions 


which are discussed in the beginning of each of the two halves; each work, 


however, in addition to ot the one class of transgremions, from which it 
receives [" name, treats of a number of others as well. 


THE PÅTIMOKEHA AND THE VIBHANGA. XVII 


be observed, that if we read the ordinances of the Påti- 
mokkha, without the commentary of the Vibhanga, we find 
that they constitute one uninterrupted whole ;! and, more- 
over, it frequently happens that a rule refers to the one 
immediately preceding it, in а manner that would be 
altogether unintelligible if the two had been originally 
separated by the intervening explanations of the Vibhaüga.* 

Bo, too, both the nature and effect of the explanations 
themselves seem conclusively to point to their later origin. 
Sometimes they extend the application of the rules, at 
others limit their operation, while occasionally they give 
directions for preventing their evasion. In some cases also 
the explanations substitute an entirely new rule, based upon 
a development of the law which took place since the framing 
of the rules. 

A striking instance of this is seen in the proceedings 
against those Bhikkhus who by their evil conduct have 
set a bad example to laymen and their families (kuladüsaka 
påpasamåcårs). The following account of these proceedings 
is given in the Påtimokkhs.? 

The Bhikkhus are to remonstrate with the accused upon 
his course of life,‘ and pronounce upon him sentence of 
banishment from his place of abode.’ If he resists and 
accuses the Bhikkhus of prejudice, they are to repeat the 
sentence; and if he should still persist in his obstinacy, they 
are to warn him three times to refrain from во doing. If 
this also proves of no avail, he is guilty of “ Samghådisesa,” 
and has to submit to the penalty of the Mánatta; and 
thereupon, before the assembled congregation, by the cere- 


1 This is not the case with the precepts of Buddha when extracted from the 
Mehavagga or Cullav 

3 For example: tama tbikkhazo, in the 49th Pacittiys; tatbavadind bbikkhunå, 
in the 69th Pacittiye. 

5 Bee the last rule of the Terasnådesa (Minayeff, р. 6). 

* Bo bhikkhu bbikkhühi evam assa vacantyo, etc. 

* Pakkamat” йуалта imamhá åvåså, alan te idha үйлепй 'Н. К 

* Во bhikkhu bhikkb ani yåvatatiyam samanubhásitabbo tama patinissaggáya. 


XVIII THE PÅTIMOKKHA AND THE VIBHANGA. 


mony of the Abbhåna, it is to be shown that the penance has 
been undergone. 

Now the details which the Vibhaiga furnishes with 
regard to this rule of the Påtimokkha permit of our 
distinguishing two different stages in the further develop- 
ment of the proceeding. The first of these is represented 
by the explanations added in the Vibhangsa to the text of 
the rule, the second by the account, prefixed by way of 
introduction, of some special case that is said to have 
provoked the making of the rule. 

The explanations upon the whole follow the course which 
the rule itself specifies; but they give more complicated 
orders respecting the exhortations to be addressed to the 
persons accused; they prescribe a greater number of repeti- 
tions of the exhortations, and cause these at first to be 
proposed by one Bhikkhu alone, and afterwards in the 
presence of the assembled congregation.' 

The pictare of the proceedings against the Assajipunabba- 
sukA bhikkhü, as presented by the account in the Vibhanga, 
differs much more from the text of the Påtimokkha. Buddha 
эң AAAS PRESS 5 TROP EKTET : CRISTAE 

n AssajipunabbasukAé bhikkhü oodetabbå, codetvå såre- 
tabbå, edretva Apattim ropetabbå, åpattim ropetvå vyattens 
bbikkhuná patibalena samgho fiåpetabbo: аши me bhante 
samgho. ime Assojipunabbasuké bhikkhü kuladdsakA på- 
seen . . ram samghassa pattakallam, samgho 
Assajipunsbbssukánam bhikkhünam Kitågirismå pabbája- 
niyakammam kareyya na Aesajipunabbasukehi bhikkhühi 
Kitágirismim vatthabban ti, eto. In place of the repeated 

1 The explanations exactly follow the text, as far as the words alan te idha 
visend "ti (Minayeff, p. 6,1. 16); but then they prescribe a second and a third 
See go on to mys эр йа sughcma|jbew på Ёма vesnbbo: 


marimi етеш атаса... . dutiyam pi vattabbo, tatiyam pi vattabbo. Then: 
so bbikkbu samanubhásitabbo, The samanubbâsanå is then described as а 


ESE RTS 


THE PÅTIMOKEHA, MAHÁVAGGA, AND CULLAVAGGA. XIX 


admonition by the Bhikkhus prescribed in the Påtimokkha, 
we find in these statements a peculiar ecclesiastical decree 
(Bamghakemma), fulfilled by the Samgha, of which the 
Påtimokkha knows nothing. The restoration of the penitent 
culprit then takes place by the revocation (patippassaddhi) 
of the Kamma, not by the ancient ceremonies of the Månatta 
and of the Abbhåna. It deserves to be noticed that in 
the same way as the Pabbåjaniyakamms is not mentioned 
in the Påtimakkha, neither is there any mention of the 
similar proceedings of the Ukkhepaniyakamma, eto., how- 
ever much occasion for it might appear. 

It seams to me unnecessary here to give any further 
enumeration of instances where the Påtimokkha proves itself 
to be the older, as compared with what has been added in 
the Vibhaöga. The publication of the works themselves 
will enable every one to make his own observations and to 
form his own opinions on this question. I will here merely 
point to the fact that the other two works included in the 
Vinaya, the Máhavagge and the Cullavagga,® although 
they do not stand in the same direct relation to the P&ti- 
mokkhs as does the Vibhanga, nevertheless distinctly pre- 
suppose ita existence. The Mahávagga? gives precepte 
concerning the recital of the Pütimokkha, which put it 
beyond а doubt that the name Påtimokkha refers here to 
that text which we also possess under the same name. 
Farther, the laws against forbidden acts, scattered through 
the Mahåvagga and Cullavagga, clearly presuppose the exist- 
ence of an earlier collection of those prohibitions to which 
they are the supplement. The difference between such 
transgressions as were in earlier times (in the Påtimokkhs) 
кыс ые ш ора ыы ss 
this Pacittiya and the story narrated there stand in exactly the same сопігайіо- 
tion, as bas been proved in the case of the Pabbåjaniyakamma. 

з The Parivåra, the fifth Book of the Vinayspitaks, is of mach more recent 


date, and, in fact, does not come into consideration in questions relating to the 


history of the origi of the Vinaya. 
3 IL 16. 1. gn T 


XX “HE PÅTIMOKKHA, MAHAVAGGA, AND CULLAVAGGA. 


threatened with penance, and such as were added at a later 
period (in the Mahåvagga and Cullavagga) to the old list, is 
also evident from the terminology used for the penance 
which followed upon a transgression of this kind. The 
Pátimokkha in this case uses the expressions Påråjike, 
Bamghádisesa, Påoittiya, ete. Now the circle of offences 
which constitute a Pacittiya, eto., appeared in later times аз 
completed ; if a punishment was to be inflicted for a trans- 
gression not specified in the Påtimokkha, they avoided using 
the expression Pácittiys, because, in doing this, they would 
have made an unsuthorized addition of new matter to the 
ordinances of the Påtimokkha as fixed of old, which was 
considered as inadmissible. Hence an offence of this kind, 
if it was a slight one, was termed Dukkata; if grievous, 
Thullaccaya. Any direct repetition of what had already been 
described in the Påtimokkha was, in general, avoided in the 
detailed explanations of the Mahåvagga and Cullevagga. 
If circumstances, nevertheless, made it desirable to give a 
repetition of this kind, there was in the outward form of 
euch allusions, without any exception, some reference to 
the corresponding propositions in the Påtimokkha, as if to 
something that had already been determined elsewhere.' 
The proofs given will be sufficient to show that the 
Pütimokkha is the earliest literary record of the Buddhist 
Vinaya. Of the further development of the Vinsya literature 
from this foundation, the following stages may be recognized. 
The first thing done was to make a commentary on the 
Påtimokkha. The text of the ancient formulas was fur- 
nished, sentence by sentence and word by word, with expla- 
nations or в paraphrase. These explanations, when the 


1 Com stone 3 енсе Mahiraggn, IV. 16, 26, with reference to 
the 63rd Pacittiya; anådariye påcitti yep, par Jag IV. 17, Т, 8, with reference 
to the 64th Paataya, At times allusion is mad ihe formals, yatbådhammo 

mig å the к prescribed in the Påtimokkha for а transgression ; for 
49, 6, with reference to the 85th Pårittiya; Maha- 
meni. TE 10, Erica кы to the 23rd Nimaggiya. There are numerous 


FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF THE VINAYA. XXI 


redaction of the Vinsyapitake was subsequently taken in 
hand, were all admitted into it! . 

"With regard to their form of expression, these explana- 
tions did not pretend to come from Buddha himself ; there 
was no admixture of narrative or dislogical elements; it 
was a simple commentary on the words of the Pátimokkha, 
without any ornamentation.* 

These first two periods in the literary development of 
the Vinaya were followed by a third, characterized by the 
greater breadth which it gave to its literary productions. 
It started again—as could scarcely fail to be the case— 
from the Påtimokkha, and in a twofold manner. In the 
first place, the old material was treated anew, in accordance 
with the characteristics of the new era. While in earlier 
times the fundamental laws themselves were arranged briefly 
and simply, and in the following period were explained and 
paraphrased in an equally simple manner, the epoch we are 
now speaking of had a misronY to relate about all of them, 
in many instances long series of histories, in all of which 
Buddha himself pronounces his decision as to which cases 
fall within the said regulations and whioh do not. This is 


1 The greater portion of this commentary on the Pátimokkha has naturally 
found its place in the VibbeBgs in the discussion of the several Bikkbüpada, of 
whicb tbe Pátimokkhs is composed. This commentary is in most distinct con- 
trast to the loosely connected narrative portions which—of all component parte of 
the Vibbafiga—were last added to it. Only ons part of this ancient commentary 
on the Påtimokkha bas been placed outside the үрен: the explanation of the 
formulas which introduce the recitation of the Pátimokkha has been admitted into 
the патака (IL. 3), together with these formulas themselves. If this 
— which is distinctly different from the style of description otherwise met with in 
the Mahávaggs—be compared with the corresponding explanatory in 
the Vibhaligs, it will at once be perceived that in both passages we bare before 
us portions of the same original work. that this work is older than the Vinaya- 
pitaka in its present form, and that at the time of the redaction of the Pitaka the 
older work was admitted into it. 
з Tbe small portion of this commentary thet is contained in the Mahüv 
I. 3) furnishes a sufficient proof for these assertions. In some passages of the 
Vibhange, the address bhikkbave (i.e. “O monks") is added in these explanatory 
parts, which makes it appear as if Buddha was speaking. The character of the 
pamages in question, however, leaves no doubt that this address has been added 
“ше time of the uri ao Halon, ы TS ids 
very clear proof of how the same legal inge were represented in 
the different l of their development in Zhe threo mesnine elementa which 
constitute the Vibhañga (the text of the Påtimokkhe, the commentary and the 
histories) is furnished by the already discussed ordinances (p. xvii—xix) with 
regard to the proceeding» against the kuladüsaks püpasamácárs. 


XXII VIBHANGA AND KHANDHAKA. 


not the only instance in the history of Buddhism, as of 
history in general, that the further removed, with respect 
to time, documenta, or pretended documents, are, from the 
eventa themselves, the more accurate becomes the knowledge 
they pretend to contain of them. That the histories, which 
have in this manner been added to the several rules of the 
Påtimokkha, have for the most part been invented, and, 
moreover, invented in an extremely awkward and con- 
ventional way, will be perfectly evident to every one who 
reads а series of them one after the other. 

The new version of the Påtimokkha, enriched with 
histories, is contained in the first two of the five parts of 
the Vinayapitaka, and bears the title of Vipmafoa. 

While the Vibhaiiga stands іп the closest relation to the 
Påtimokkha, there was a new and wider circle of additions 
added to that same centre of the Vinaya-discipline—the 
Påtimokkha—most probably about the same time in which 
the Vibhange originated: an endeavour was made to go 
beyond the more confined domain of that series of eccle- 
siastical offences as established of old, to give a coherent 
picture of the whole legal life of the Samgha. Тһеу gave a 
detailed and connected account of the admission into the 
Samgha, of the ceremony of the Uposatha, of the annually 
recurring observances which were connected with the ap- 
pearance of the rainy season, etc. The titles of the two 
works in which these accounts are given are MaHÅVaGGA 
and CuLLAVaGGA, comprehended also under the common 
title of KmANDHAKA. As in the Vibhanga, here also the 
outward form was arranged in such a way that in the case 
of every statute a history was given relative to the occasion 
upon which Buddha made the said regulation. The whole 
style of composition of the Mahávegga and Cullavegga 
corresponds so exactly with that of the later written parts 
of the Vibhaiiga, +в. the narrative portions, that it may be 
assumed with certainty that these texts were composed 


EARLIEE AND LATER VINAYA TEXTS. XXIH 


almost contemporaneously.! The histories, as a whole, are 
as undoubtedly pure inventions as those in the Vibhanga; 
this does not, of course, prevent their belonging to the 
most valuable sources for our knowledge of the life of the 
ancient Buddhist community. An essential difference be- 
tween the Vibhangs on the one band, and the Mahåvaggs 
and the Cullavagga on the other, lies in the fact that in 
the case of the Vibhangs the stories were added to an 
original basis of ecclesiastical regulations that had existed 
of old, £e. the Pátimokkha, whereas in the two other works 
the ecclesiastical regulations, and the stories given in con- 
nexion with these, were composed at one and the aame time, 

Taking all in all, if, on the one hand, we compare the 
short precepta of the Påtimokkha, and, on the other, the 
stories, the endless pariydya, the whole of the great appa- 
ratus that is brought forward in these Vinaya books, we 
shall find а very distinct contrast between the two literary 
epochs reflected in the said worke At the time when 
these later Vinaya works originated, the Buddhist literature 
was still far from the literary form of the Mahåvaipulys- 
sütra, but still a step in advance had been made on the 
path which subsequently led to it. 

Without doubt, a careful investigation of the Surrari- 
ТАКА would lead to similar results. As in the case of the 
Vinaya, we should be able to distinguish various atrata 
representing the literary activity of those different periods, 
As I am too imperfectly acquainted with the materials 
in question, it is impossible for me, as yet, to make these 


1 In the Mahar or the Cullavagga, where the discussion is of regulations 
that also occur in the Vibhaüga, the same stories are related in connexion 
with them. Thus for instance, the MT of Pilindavaccha aod of the King 
[pide is ne identically in the Mahdvegga (VI. 16) and in the Vibhañgs 


Hir d The stor) of the proceedings against the Asssjipunsbi 
pod tbe MN (Sega 15), and also in Ње book of 
the Cullav It been proved above that this story points to а later form 


of the discip proceedings in question than was known to the Påtimokkbe 
and its earliest трай itaran it deserves to be noticed that the Cullavagga bears 
witness to the Larasr form of the procedure. 


XXIV THE SUTTAPITAKA. 


investigations with the requisite accuracy. I must oonfine 
myself here to а few remarks. 

Generally speaking, the probability is that the fixing 
of ‘the fundamental doctrines of the Dhamma took place 
somewhere about tho same time as the fixing of the funda- 
mental laws of the Vinaya, that is the fixing of the 
Påtimokkha. If we may reckon the confeasional-meetings, 
at which the Påtimokkha was read aloud, as one of the 
most ancient elements in the life of the Buddhist com- 
munity, then the need for an authentic fixing of the most 
important doctrines—the recognition of which united the 
members of the community among one another—can scarcely 
have been less old. 

The earliest form in which these doctrines have been 
laid down was in all probability not that of the Sutta 
as we have it. These Sutta, as regards style, show the 
very greatest resemblance to the narrative portions of the 
Vinaya; the dogmatic doctrines are not stated directly, 
but are put into the mouth of the Buddha, and we are told 
of the occasion upon which he proclaimed them, precisely 
in the same way as the ecclesiastical prohibitions are 
manipulated in the Vibhanga. Now we have seen that 
the Vibhaiga was preceded by an earlier period of Vinaya 
literature, in which the ecclesiastical ordinances them- 
selves were given with all brevity, without being put 
into Buddha's mouth, and without being interwoven with 
any stories. It will not appear too bold a supposition 
to assume that the literature of the Dhamma developed 
in a similar manner. The Buddhist community began, 
in my opinion, with the fixing of the most important 
doctrines, such as the four Ariyasacca, the twelve NidAns, etc., 
without employing any narrative form; if the Bhikkhus, 
at the time of their assemblies, propounded the Dhamma 
to one another, their discourses probably consisted of the 
recital of such dogmatical paragraphs. The same changes 


THE THREE COUNCILS. хху 


in the views and literary tendencies which have led to 
the composition of the Vibhaüga, on the foundation of the 
Pátimokkha, probably have caused that, as a development 
of these ancient Dhammapariyåya, the modern Suttanta 
were produced, in which the doctrines are no longer directly 
taught, but where the stories are told how Buddha had 
once propounded them. 

Such scholars as have access to the Buttapitaka in ita full 
extent, should test these conjectures by the texts themselves, 
and correct what proves to be erroneous. 


We have as yet spoken merely of the relative age of the 
various parts of the Buddhist Holy Scriptures. In order 
to fix the date itself of their origin, we must first of all 
examine the tradition concerning the most important events 
in the earliest ecclesiastical history of the Buddhists, that 
of the three Councus. 

According to the traditional and widely-spread story, 
Buddha’s discourses were collected and fixed in an authentio 
form at the first Council, held a few months after the 
Master's death; this collection of the Holy texts ів said 
to have subsequently been subjected to new revisions at 
one following Council according to northern secounts,' at 
two Councils according to southern reporta If the tradi- 
tion could be relied upon in this form, the questions we 
are engaged upon would in all essential points be settled 
by it; if it cannot, we must—before casting the statements 
concerning the Councils entirely overboard—examine what 
facts may perhaps be found to shine through them. It is 
possible that these facts might throw some light upon the 
history of the development of the Buddhist sacred canons, 
although perhaps in a different way than seamed likely 
before the test was applied. 

1 We here leave the amembly held under King Kanishka entirely out of the 


on. 
€ 


XXVI ANCIENT ACCOUNT OP THE COUNCILS. 


We shall confine our examination, in the first place, to 
the first and second Councils, concerning which the records 
of the northern and southern Buddhists essentially agree ; 
the third Council, which is known almost solely to the 
southern records, we shall speak of afterwards. 

Of the accounts referring to the first two Councils, the 
single section of the Pali Tipitaka itself which treats of 
these events deserves to be classed first. This is the 
closing chapter of the Cullavaggs already mentioned. Ав 
the text of it will be given complete in my edition, I shall 
here confine myself to stating briefly the contents, in eo far 
as they concern our present inquiry. 

The tradition of the Councils takes up the thread of the 
story where the accounts of the life and work of Buddha, 
given in the Suttapitake, end. After the death of the 
Master—eo it is related in the Cullavagga—Subhadda, the 
last disciple converted by Buddha shortly before his death, 
proclaimed views which threatened the dissolution of the 
community. “о not grieve, do not lament,” he is 
said to have said to the believers; “it is well, that we 
have been relieved of the great Master's presence; we were 
oppressed by him, when he said: ‘thie is permitted to 
you, this is not permitted.’ In future, we can do as we 
like, and not do as we do not like." In opposition to Su- 
bhadda—the tradition goes on to relate—there came forward 
one of the most distinguished and oldest of Buddha's dis- 
ciples, the great Kassapa, who proposed that five hundred 
of the most eminent members of the community should 
assamble at Råjagaha, the royal residence of the ruler of 
Magadha, in order to collect the Master’s precepts in an 
authentic form. It has already been said above, how, 
during the seven months’ sitting of the assembly, Kassapa, 
the President, fixed the Vinaya, with the assistance of Upåli, 
the Dhamma with Ananda 

This ie the story as it has come down to us. What we 


THE FIRST COUNCIL. XXVII 


have here before us is not history, but pure invention, 
and, moreover, an invention of no very ancient date. Apart 
from internal reasons that might be adduced to prove this, 
we are able to prove it by comparing another text which 
is older than this story, and the author of which cannot 
yet have known it. I allude to the highly important Sutta, 
which gives an account of the death of Buddha, and the Pali 
text of which has recently been printed by Prof. Childera. 
This Sutta! gives the story—in long passages word for 
word the same aa in the Cullavagga—of the irreverent 
conduct of Subhadds, which Kassapa opposes by briefly 
pointing to the true consolation that should support the 
disciples in their separation from the Master. Then follows 
the account of the burning of Buddha’s corpse, of the dis- 
tribution of his relics among the various princes and cities, 
and of the festivals that were instituted in honour of these 
relica. Everything that the legend of the Council alleges 
as & motive for and as the background to the story about 
Kassapa’s proposal for holding the Council, is found here 
altogether, except that there is'no allusion to the proposal 
itself or to the Council We hear of those speeches of 
Subhadda, which, according to the later tradition, led 
Kassapa to make his proposal, but we do not hear anything 
of the proposal itself. We hear of the great assembly 
that meets for the distribution of Buddha’s relics, in which 
— according to the later tradition—Kassapa's proposal was 
agreed to, but we do not hear anything of all these trans- 
actions. It may be added: we hear in this same Sutta 
(pp. 39, 60, 61) of the precepts which Buddha delivered to 
his followers ehortly before his death, concerning doubts 
and differences of opinion that might arise, among the 
members of the community, with regard to the Dhamma 
and the Vinaya, and with regard to the treatment of such 
cases when he should no longer be with them. If any- 
1 pp. 67, 68, in the edition of Ohilders. 


XXVIII THE FIRST COUNCIL. 


where, we should certainly have expected to find here some 
allusion to the great authentic depositions of Dhamma and 
Vinaya after Buddha’s death, which, according to the 
general belief of Buddhists, established a firm standard, 
according to which such differences could be judged and 
have been judged through many centuries. There is not 
the alightest trace of any such allusion to this Council 
This silence is as valuable as the. most direct testimony : it 
shows that the author of the Maháparinibbána Sutta did not 
know anything of the firat Council) 

We may assume, with some probability, that the fact of 
the second Council does not play an unimportant part 
among those circumstances which led to the origin of the 
legends concerning the first Council; such dualiams of 
the same occurrences are, as is well known, often met with 
in historical legends. The ideas, out of which the story 
arose, can scarcely be considered doubtful. Buddha was 


1 I shall here give the passage from the Cullavagga that comes into considera- 


tion, in order that it may be compared with the Mabåpar. 8. (pp. 67, 68). 
Kassapa says to the Bhikkhos: tatråvuso ye te bbikkhO" avttardgiomveniencce 


a TET 

AT SEP": a ETD Å Ө 
antarahitan ti. ye pana fe bhikkhü vitarágá te satá sampaján& adhivásenti : 
eniccá eambhara tam Коб ettha labbbå 'ti. atha khv ábam &vuso te bhikkbü 
etad avocarp (observe the alteration in the succession of the speeches compared 
with the Mahåper. 6.): alam åvuso má socittha má paridevittha, nany etam 
Avaso bhagavatå pstigacc’ eva akkhátam, sabbeh' eva Ri ebi manüpebi 
nånåbhåro vinåbbåvo aMfistbåbhåro, tam kot’ ettha åruso Toba yan {ат 
jåtam bhütam samkhatam palokedhammam tam vata må palujjtti, пеат 
fhánam vijjatiti. tena kho pana samsyens åvuso Subhaddo пата buddha- 
pabbejito tamam parisåyam nisinno hot. atha kho avuso Subbaddo buddha- 
pabbajito te bhikkhü etad avoca: alam ávuso må socittha må paridevittha, 
sumuttå mayam tena mebåsamspeve, upaddutå са mayam homs idam vo 
kappati i vo па kappatiti, idáni рапа meyam yam icchissàma tam kariesüma, 
yam па icchi па tam karimámá 'ti, etc.—Thas in the Cullavagga the 
incident is related by Kasapa at the great amembly of Bbikkhus, and this 
narrative is followed by the proposal made by him: banda mayam åvuso 
dhemmafi cs тірауай са samgáyüma, pure adhammo dippati dhammo patibá- 
hiyati, etc.— The whole of this story is taken from the åpar.-Butta; bat 
Subhadda's speech and Kesespe's words of consolation are . The 
reason of this transposition it is not difficult to understand. and characteristic. 
In the Mabápar.-Sutta, the interferenoe of Subhadda is settled Ri the very fact 
of so important a person as Mahåkasmapa raising his voice. In the Cullavagga 
it is more appropriate that it should not yet be settled, in order that it may form 
the basis to Kassapa's proposal. Hence, in this text, Subhadda's words are 
laced at the end, in order that Keesapa’s proposal, which was called forth 

y them, may be attached to them. 


THE SECOND COUNCIL. XXIX 


dead; the two other members of the ancient Buddhist 
trinity, the Doctrine and the Community, were to survive 
the Master. It can hardly seem strange that, in order to 
give this continuance the right legendary expression, an 
authentic settlement of the Doctrine by the Community 
was invented, and that, for the strict preservation of the 
chronological continuity, this settlement was supposed to 
have taken place directly after Buddha' death. To finish 
the picture of these proceedings, the Council of Vesåli 
furnished the necessary materials.' 

The account of the sEcoND Council stands in a very 
different position to the first with regard to its historical 
authenticity. The northern and southern records corre- 
spond in stating that the assembly was occasioned by ten 
deviations from the strict discipline of the earliest times, 
having occurred in Vesáli. The ten points in question 
аге extremely characteristic of the atmosphere in which the 
Buddhist community lived at the time. It was disputed 
whether the daily meal, in place of being partaken of at 
mid-day, might not also be partaken of when the shadows 
had attained the breadth of two fingers, and so forth. We 
thus perceive that the grand intellectual movement which 
we call Buddhism had even at that time lost the spirit of 
freedom upon which it was founded, and that it had de- 
generated into monkieh ceremoniousness. 

It is not my intention here to reproduce the detailed and 
most instructive account given in the Cullavagga of the 
course taken in the dispute concerning the ten doctrines; 
it is an account which, with all its pedantio anatching after 
trifles, bears the stamp of being in the highest degree 
trustworthy. The dispute was settled before an assembly 


1 Tho influence exercised by the tradition of the second Council upon the 
first also explains why the first is called Vinayasamgiti in the Cullavagya, 
although it was believed to have had to do just as well with the Dhamma as with 
the Vinaya, The second Council confned itself wholly to the domain of the 
уша» aud did not occupy itself with the Dhamma in the strict sense of tha 
wo 


XXX THE SEOOND COUNCIL. 


of seven hundred of the faithful at Vesåli; and the ten 
erroneous doctrines were rejected. 

With this the CULLAYAGGA closes its report of the as- 
sembly at Vesáli The story sasumes quite a different 
appearance by an addition given to it by the later southern 
records, with whioh the northern records correspond in all 
essential points. The Dipavames, for instance, saya (5, 26, 
and following) :— 

"The eight mighty Theras destroyed the ten false 
doctrines and dispersed the wicked ones. After they had 
dispersed the wicked Bhikkhus and put down the false 
doctrine, the eight powerful Theres selected 700 Arhate 
in order to purify their own doctrine; selecting the best 
ones, they made a revision of the Dhamma. In the 
famous city of VesAli, in the Kåtågfra hall, this second 
assembly was brought to a close after a period of eight 
months.” 

The difference between the earlier and the later account 
of the Council held at Vesåli is of considerable importance 
for the history of the Buddhist holy literature. Acoord- 
ing to the later version, we were expected to believe 
that this Council had revised the whole of the Holy texts; 
the earlier and undoubtedly authentic account knows 
nothing about this revision If the later version were 
correct, it would be unintelligible that the very detailed 
earlier version of the acts of this Council should 
have omitted thie main point, and had represented the 
insignificant disputes concerning the ten propositions as if 
the Council had been entirely occupied with them. We 
have slready epoken of the influence which the Council 
of Vesåli probably exercised upon the legend of the first 
Council. In the present case, conversely, at в later period, 
the account of the first Council had, to all appearance, re- 
acted upon the second, and was the cause of the belief 
that a Dhammasamgaha was said to have been instituted 


THE THIRD COUNCIL. XXXI 


by the Yasa, the Revata, and their associates, in the same 
sense as had formerly been said to have been dene by 
Kassapa. 

The result which this investigation furnishes to the ques- 
tion regarding the origin of the collection of the sacred 
wriünge, we may state to be this: the first Council i 
certainly brought by the tradition into connexion wi 
the redaction of this collection, but this tradition contains 
no historical truth; the tradition of the second Counoil fø 
historical, but in its authentio form it does not bring this 
Council into any connexion with the collection of the 
sacred books. Our inference is thus, for the present, a 
purely negative one; from the statements concerning the 
two Councils, nothing is directly gained with regard to 
the points in question. We shall subsequently have to 
return to the indirect results that might poembly be 
obtained; but we must first consider the THIRD Council, 
held under King DmawMásoka. Ав is well known, the 
tradition! in Ceylon concerning it is as follows :— 

The acts of favour shown to the Community by Asoka 

‚ induced a number of heretics to join the Community. For 
seven years the sacred ceremonies could not be performed, 
as the presence of these non-believers interfered with them. 
The King issued & command to the Community, through 
one of his officers, that the religious ceremonies must be 
observed ; and, as this command was disregarded, the King’s 
minister put several of the Bhikkhus to death with his 
own hand. The King, horrified at this proceeding, en- 
deavoured to atone for it. Tho Bhikkhus advised him 
to invite the aged teacher MocoartPurrA; the latter came 
to the capital, preached before the King, and assured him 
that the minister's crime in no way affected him. Moggalt- 
putta then selected, from among the great host of Bhikkhus 


! The tradition is contained in the T emm. the Mahávamss, and the 
Bamsntapdafdik& of Buddhagbosa. In the concluding chapter of the Cullavagga, 
the first two Councils only are epoken of. 


i . 
XXXII THE THIRD COUNCIL. 


who had assembled in the capital, one thousand of them 
to hold а Council with him. The false doctrines of those 
who had forced themselves into the Community were 
denounced; Moggaliputta then, in а treatise called Kath&- 
vatthu, described the dogmatic position held by himself 
and his followers, and proclaimed it before the Council. 
This work is still preserved in the collection of the РАШ 
Abhidhamma. 

In the domains of northern Buddhism there is but little 
said concerning the third Council! But it is incorrect to 
suppose that it was wholly unknown? there. That the 
references made to this Council are but rare may easily 
be accounted for. 

It is well known that the period between the Councils 
of Vesåli and Påtaliputta is assumed by our records to 
have been the time of the origin of those schisms whioh 
separated the Buddhist fraternity into eighteen different 
schools. Moggaliputte, to whom is attributed the leading 
part at the Council of Påtaliputta, was not an authority 
recognized throughout the whole domain of the Buddhist 
church (the very fact of the eighteen sects excludes such 
an assumption); he wes, in fact, merely the head of one 
school. The Council, at which Moggaltputta formulated 
his own opinions, and denounced all views that differed 
from his own, resulted in а decisive triumph for his party 
over its adversaries. Thus it is perfectly intelligible that 
mention is so frequently made of these proceedings in the 
records of the Sinhalese, who consider themselves as 
belonging to the school of Moggaliputta, and so rarely, if at 
all, by the northern Buddhists. The tradition which ascribes 


1 Mr. Beal writes to me: “With respect to the Councils, ALL THB Cumas 
YERSION6 oF тив Vaya Prraxa agree in alluding only to two. There is no 
mention whatever of a Council at Påtaliputra.” Ја this the Chinese texta 
correspond fectly with the Pali versions of the Vinaya Pitaks, which likewise 
mention only two Councils; but we must beware not to conclude from this 
that the third Council is a mere invention. 

* Beo the remarks of Köppen, die Religion des Buddha, vol. i. p. 139. 


THE THIRD COUNCIL. XXXIII 


the origin of differences of the schools to the period between 
the second and third Councils, and the fact tbat the 
northern and southern records speak much in the same 
way of the first two Councils, and not so with regard to 
the third, mutually confirm and explain each other. As 
a counterpart to the almost absolute silence in the records 
of the northern texts concerning Moggaliputta, it may be 
mentioned that Upagupte whom the Buddhists of the 
north regard as the highest ecclesiastical authority under 
Asoka, is, as far as I know, nowhere mentioned by the 
Binhalese. 

After what has been said, we must not, from the fact that 
the northern writers do not allude to the third Council, 
entertain any suspicion of the Sinhalese historians having 
wilfully divided the facts belonging to the second Council, 
and framed two different Councils of them, or of their 
having referred to King Asoka—in whose reign the second 
Council was held—as to two different kings of the eame 
name. As little would it be correct to say that the 
northern writers have described the second and third 
Councils as one. The two incidents have nothing what- 
ever in common, with the exception of the accidental 
identity of names of the kings in whose reigns the events 
occurred; that most of the northern writers knew of or 
wished to know of but one of these events, is certainly as 
correct, as it is incorrect to aasume that they turned the 
two into one. 

ing сойот of di diference beeen ths mE Amokas, Tur graat King 
Dhammasoka he always calla Wov-rzov, and speaks of him as a well-known 
person. Now, he at one time says (Mémoires de Н. Ths., vol. i. р. 414): “ Dans la 
première centaine d'années qui suivit le Nirviga, il y eut un roi nommé 'O-cuov- 
жі, qui était l'arribre-petit-flls du roi Pin-pi-so-lo (Bimbisåra). Il quitta la 
ville de Is maison du roi (Bájegriha), éra ва cour à Po-tch'a-li (Påtali- 
fafor) end afterwards Dhemmisoke i spoken of under the name of Моа ув 
TEM is the only passage where Hiouen uses the name 'O-ohou-kia, It 


undoubted that the author here understood 'O-chou-kis and Won-yeou to 
be two different persons. 


XXXIV CHRONOLOGICAL RESULTS. 


The Councils of Vesålt and Påtaliputta, respecting which 
we have here expressed our opinion, are the fixed points in 
the history of the earlier form of Buddbism. In order to 


to this period, we ‘must look for tho NA whioh 
connect them with those primary events. 

In the above investigation, we have already spoken of 
eeveral facts which must be placed in the period between 
the Council of Vesáli and that of Pataliputta. This period, 
first of all, saw the origin of the schisms, and was also 
the time of the development of the Abhidhamma literature, 
which was brought to a close by the proclamation of the 
text of the Kathåvatthu at the Council of Pátaliputta.! 
The composition of the closing chapter of the Cullavagga, 
which contains an account of the first two Councils, is, on 
* the one hand, olearly of later origin than the Assembly at 
Vesåli, and, on the other hand, of an earlier date than 
the origin of the schiamatic schools and of the Abhi- 
dbamma books, for this identical chapter is met with in 
the Vinaya of the different schools at a corresponding 
place, and it does not mention the Abhidhamma among 
the sacred writings of whioh it gives а survey intended to 
be complete. | 

What, however, ia the chronological relation between the 
origin of the main substance of the Vinaya (i.e. of the 
whole Pitake, with the exception of this story of the 
Councils, and of the Parivåra) and the Councils of Vesålt 
and Påtaliputta P 

The account of the Councils follows upon the actual 
closing chapter of the Vinaya, containing tho laws for the 


1 Itis scarcely n to remark that the contemporaneous origin of the 
schisms and of the Abhi hidkamme i is not accidental, but that in it tbe natural 
Connerion of the events is apparent. The same characteristic signature of that 
very stage of the development of Buddhism, which fint advanced from the 
simple handing over and receiving of the doctrines, to а eystematical (5 
tizing, shove itself both in the domain of literature in the origin of the Abhi- 

dhamma; sad in (ho. domaia of eeu Dis thoss disputes which hare 
p e grest 


` 


CHRONOLOGICAL RESULTS. . XXXV 


Bhikkhunis.' It is evident that this account is written as 
the. conclusion or an appendix to the Vinaya, and Gal 
eccordingly, the main substance of the Vinaya laws was 
not composed later. It remains to be considered whether, 
at the time the closing chapter was composed, the principal 
pert of the work did already exist as a complete whole, 
or whether the closing chapter and the other portions of 
the Vinaya were composed at one and the same time. It 
seems to me thet the first of these alternatives possesses 
by far the greater amount of probability, not to say cer- 
tainty. And that for two reasons. First we must con- 
sider the circumstance that in the closing chapter the 
redaction of the whole Vinaya is said to have been made 
immediately after Buddha’s desth. Now, though this tra- 
dition is proved to be untenable, it surely follows from 
the very fact of its existence—with perfect certainty— 
that, at the time the story in question was written, the 
redaction of the Vinaya was not a fact just accomplished 
or still held in freah remembrance, and that least of all 
сап it have been a part of the same diaskouasis which 
gave rise to the very story that transposes that redaction 
& hundred years back. 

Another point deserving consideration here is the treat- 
ment or non-treatment in the Vinaya of those questions 
which formed the subjects of discussion at the second 
Council 

No reader of the Vinaya will hesitate to admit that 
this collection contains not an historical account of what 
BuppHa permitted and forbade, but an account of what 
was regarded as allowable and forbidden at в certain period 
long after Buddha’s time. Now the whole second Council 

1 The Bhikkhunts are constantly spoken of in tho Vinaya after the conclusion 
of the laws relative to the Bhikkbos. In t with the fundamental divi- 
sion of the Vinaya into two main parts (Pårdjike Påcittira—Mahå' Culla- 
vagga), ve find the regulations ref ing to the Bhikkhunts coll in two 


passages. in the Bhikkhuotvibbaiga at the end of the Pacittiya, and at the end 
Bf the Cullaraggs before the story of the Councils 7 


XXXVI THE SECOND COUNCIL AND THE VINAYA TEXTS. 


was nothing more than a discussion on the permissibility of 
certain indulgences, а discussion which excited the attention 
of the whole community in the highest degree. We may 
with full assurance infer that if the discussions as to what 
was permitted and what forbidden, which we have before 
. us in the Vinaya, were established after the time of this 
Council, it was next to unavoidable that, in appropriate 
passages, it should be directly stated how the Bhikkhus 
were to act with regard to the points so hotly disputed at 
Vesåli. The materials for comparing the points disputed 
at Vesåli with the doctrines of the Vinaya are all in our 
possession. The account in the Cullavagga concerning the 
Council even directly mentions, at each of the ten false 
precepts, where these are said to have been condemned by 
Buddha, во that we know upon what the ancient fraternity 
itself based the rejection of the ten heresies. Now we find 
that the text of the Vinaya, as we have it, does not in any 
way expressly touch upon most of these points ;' that, in 
fact, it does not know of the propositions discussed at VesAlt. 
The passages of the Vinaya to which the Cullavagga refers 
respecting the decision of the ten disputed points contain 
only general principles, not any express reference to the 
special subjects of the ten Vatthu. To these main pro- 
positions themselves are added—to facilitate the interpre- 
tation—fuller details, which touch upon a great number of 
special cases relating to the various rules; but the cases 
upon which the controversy at Vesåli turned are not 
specified? The texts of the Påråjike and Påcittiys—with 
the unwearied minute acuteness which is characteristic of 
the Indian mind—colleot all the in any way conceivable 
possibilities that might apply to the propositions to be 
I There is only ove of these directly mentioned in the Vinays, the tenth, 
which is obviously the most important of the disputed points, prohibiting any 

Bhikkhu from accepting gold or silver. 
* I shall for the present not give in extena in proof of this all the pammges 


that come into consideration here; the publication of the complete Vinaya will 
enable every one to form his own opinion. 


THE VINAYA OLDER THAN THE SECOND COUNCIL. XXX VII 


explained, in order to cut off every doubt as to the sense. 
Every one who knows the manner in which the discussion 
proceeds in these texts will not hesitate, with perfect con- 
fidence, to draw the conclusion that, at the time when these: 
texts received their present form, nothing was aa yet known 
of the ten Vatthu of the Bhikkhus at Vesålt. The dis- 
cussion of the ten propositions is given in the form of an 
account of the Council at VesAli, as an appendix et the 
end of the Vinaya; this, I think, is the best proof of the 
fact that when the dispute concerning the ten propositions 
was being carried on, the Vinaya itself already existed, that 
IT 18 OLDER THAN THE COUNCIL OF VEsåLf. 

Probably, however, not мосн older. If we fix the date 
of the composition of the Vinayapitaka, as handed down 
to us, too long BEFORE the Council held at Vesålt, we shall 
thereby, first of all, come too close upon Buddha's own 
day, and it is further opposed by the prophecy of Påtali- 
putta being made the capital of the kingdom of Magadha, 
as contained in the Vinaya.'  Acoording to the statement 
of Hiouen Thsang, King Kålåsoka, in whose reign the 
Council of Vesáli was held, is said to have changed his 
residence, and removed to Påtaliputta; and, indeed, the 
royal residence had been removed there at the time 
the Council was being held, if the report in the MahAvamse 
(p. 17, L 4) is correct. The removing of the residence of 
the Magadha kings to Påtaliputta must be anterior to the 
redaction of the Vinaya Pitaka as we read it. 

We shall now, in conclusion, draw up а list of the 
successive events in the literary and ecclesiastical history 
of the Buddhists, belonging to the period we have been 
пишушиий! 


1. The Genesis of the Påtimokkha. The earliest begin- 
nings of the Dhamma literature. 


3 Mahåvagga, VI. 28, 6. Compare Mahåparinibb. B., p. 18. 


XXX VIT CHRONOLOGICAL RESULTS. 


2. The formation of the Commentary on the Påtimokkha, 
which is included in the Vibhanga. 

3. The Vibhanga is compiled; the Mahåvegga and the 
Cullavagga are composed; origin of the main sub- 
stance of the Suttanta literature., 

4. Councu, лт Væsålt. i 

5. Origin of the legends of the Council at Rajagaha; 
composition of the closing chapter of the Vinaya. 

6. Schisms in the Buddhist community; origin of the 
Abhidhamma. 

7. CounciL AT PATALIPUTTA ; the KathAvatthu. 

If, as is justified by Asoka’s inscriptions, we assume the 
year 26б в.с. as the approximate date of his coronation, 
and we calculate 118 years back from this to the Council 
at Vesili—in accordance with the chronological system of 
the MahAvamsa and Dipavamsa'—we shall find the date 


1 I agree perfectly with the remarks made by Dr. Bühler ing the 
Sinhalese chronology: '' The smallness of the period, sixty years of which are 
besides covered by the reigns of Candragupta and Bindusåra, where Brahmans 
and Buddhists agree in their figures, makes a considerable deviation from the 
truth improbable, and for practical Purposes the namber of years а by the 
Buddbists may be accepted as a fact.” I believe I may be justified in i 
to this j ent of Dr. Bübler, even though I do not share his opinion that 
the edicts of Sabesråm and Rupnåtb contain an authentic confirmation of the 
chronological system of the Ginhalese, which is as old as the time of Asoka 
himself. The statement in these inscriptions regarding the length of time 
during which the king who set them up, remained a layman (updsake), does 
not seam to me to have been correctly trested by Dr. Bühler. The inscription of 
Behazrám reads: | | || || | iyåni amvacbaldoi; the inscription of Rapnath: 
sátirakekáni ајыб |ni va(så). Dr. Bühler's transcription of this inscription 
reads adhitisáni ; in the drawing in the Corpus Inscriptionum (VoL I. Р]. » 
however, the penultimate is stated to be illegible, and the photo-rincograph in 
the Indian Antiguary (June, 1877) seems to furnish the reading À rather than så 
іо the pamage in question, and the reading уй is also confirmed by the Gahasrám 
edict. It seems to me, therefore, that the only accredited reading is aghitiyani 
(or sdhatiyáni), and this is undoubtedly the same as eddhateyya and ea 
of the Pali ijja of the Jaina Pråkrit, which signifies “ two and a half." 
The King, therefore, wes not an Upåsaka for thirty-two and a half years and 
wore, but for thirty years lem. Dr. Biihler’s principal argoment in favour of 
the кїрр ймы e inseri w Кр made 7, Asoka Li аі али it is a 

е long reign o monarch, о! ө kings of aurya dynasty, whi 
tallies with the numbers given in the inscriptions. My opinion is that the 
inscriptions might have been made by any Maurys king, who hed reigned for 
at least about four years; and the Community mentioned might be any one of 
the numerous sects of that time, and—considering the erpremion “ vivutha "— 
any other rather than the Buddhist If the King was neverthelem Asoka, and 
the gha the Buddhist, the inscription wo not confirm the chronology 
of the Sinhalese, it would oppose it. 


CHRONOLOGICAL RESULTS. XXXIX 


of this Council to fall somewhere about 383 в.с.4 From 
what has been said above, the revision of the Vinaya must 
have been somewhere before that time, but not much earlier. 
Hence we ehall be right in conjecturing that it was not 
very far removed from 400».c. The error which might 
possibly arise from the inaccuracy of this calculation 
cannot at all events be a considerable one. 

I do not think we shall be overestimating the literary 
productivity of the Buddhist Samgha by considering it 
possible that, during the first ninety years after Buddha's 
death, it had produced a literature of this great compass, 
‘and one so widely scattered in strata of an earlier and 
later origin. Let us compare it with the literary produc- 
tions that emanated from the Socratic school during the 
seventy-seven years between the death of Socrates and that 
of Ariatotle, or with the works of Kant and the philo- 
ворћеге who followed him, during the fifty years between 
the publication of the Critic of Pure Reason and the death 
of Hegel. The period of Indisn history of which we are 
speaking was—this we must bear in mind—on the one 
hand, most seriously affected by the religio-ascetio thoughts 
which have created Buddhism; on the other hand, it 
possessed a perfect mastery of the literary form. It is 
most probable that other sects had preceded the Buddhists 
in laying down their ordinances for the community and 
their dogmatic principles in a literary form. What these 
secta had accomplished the Buddhists made use of; and, 
if nowhere else, they at all events found in the texta of 
the Bråhmana, of the Bütrs and Upanishad, prototypes for 
the development of a didactic material in & form appro- 
priate for the further transmission to disciples. Fellow- 
labourers in the work were to be found throughout the 
whole Jambudipa, wherever there were Bhikkhus to whom 
the doctrines of Gotams Buddha had found their way. 
Hence our opinion of the eerly origin of the Buddhist 


XL DIVISION OF SCHOOLS, 


texts, based as it is upon external proofs, does not clash, but 
agrees perfectly with the internal possibility and probability.’ 


We have hitherto endeavoured to describe the history 
of the development of the Buddhist Vinaya-literature with- 
out regard to the DIVISION OF THE SCHOOLS, all of which 
have their own texts” We pass on to an examination 
regarding that scuooL, the Vinaya-texts of which have been 
preserved to us in Ceylon, and of its position among the 
other schools into which the Buddhist church divided itself. 


I The edict of Beirát has been brought forward to the great age of 
the Buddhist Holy Scriptures in the form we now have them; to me this seems 
altogether wrong. King Asoka mentions in that edict а number of texts, the 
study of which he recommends to the fraternity and to laymen. He intended 
im no way to drew ap a list of ali the sayings of Buddha which the King con- 
sidered as authentic, but to give а selection of those which he held to be specially 
deserving of study. The fact that only some of the titles mentioned in the 
inscription have hitherto been met with in the texts cannot cause the elightest 
hesitation. First of all the Pali texts have not yet been examined so completely as 
will be necessary, and then we must remember thet the came text was ently 
known by several titles. Compare, for instance, the names which Buddha gives 
at the end of the Brahmajillasntta (Sept Suttaa, p. 57) to this discourse (Armeniis, 
Dhammajála, Brahmsj Ditthijale, тетра gag Т or let us ask, 
who, at a first glance, would recognize the identity of the Páràjika and Påcitti 
with the Suttavibhaüga, or the identity of the Agamas with the Nikåyus, os. 
Thus the “ повета. to which the inscription alludes, may be identical with 
the Såmafifisph: Ча, if we must not rather identify it with the little discourse 
contained in the Tikanipåta of the Anguttars-Nikáya which ins: ‘ Tipí- 
måni bhikkhave moneyyáni" (see the Apâyavagga ; fol. jhai of the Phayre 
MS.) The ''Munigátbà" most probably are the twelfth Sutta of the Butta- 
nipåta. The "Lågbulovåds," со ing falsehood, which is mentioned in the 
inscription, is the mibalattbikaråbulovåda, the sixty-frst among the Suttas of 
the Majjhima-Niküya. The Vinsyasamákasa (= vinaya-samdkarsha) is, I 
think, certainly not the Parivara, as Mr. Davids onos sq) This work, at 
least to judge from the Pali version which is the only one I know, is undoubtedly 
of more recent date than Asoka; besides, on account of its form, which is some- 
what like an index, it was of all the Vinaya texts least of all adapted for being 
studied in wider circles. The er å substance of the Vinaya” seems to me 
to apply rey well to the Pátimokkha. The meaning of tho title лады bbøyåni 
can gathered from the Arafifükánágatabbayasutta of the Af iküya 

iven in the Кышы T um MS. Orient. fol 039, of the Ro Library in 

lin, fol. cam). This Butta describes how the Bhikkhu, who lives a solitary life 
in the forests, should have ever before him the daogers that might suddenly put 
an end to his life—eerpents, savage animals, etc. (these are the “ fears of the 
future ”'), and such thoughts should lead him to exercise all his energies in order 
to arrive at the goal of his religious stri . 

3 The opinion of Profemor amiljew (Ber Buddhismus, p. 68 of the German 
tranalation), that the Vinaya literature was the same in all the different schools, 
is, strictly speaking, not correct. It is true, only, so far as has yet been discovered 
that the Vinaya of the different schools is based upon the same fopdamental 
теа э this original Vinaya has assumed very different forms in the dif- 

arent schools. 


THE THERAVAD! SCHOOL. хы 


Among the historical traditions of the Mahávibára in 
Ceylon,' there has been preserved an account of the eighteen 
sects which arose during the course of the second century 
after Buddha’s death; and we have several other similar 
accounts from the northern records.» The various names 
in the different reports do not always correspond exactly ; 
not only were different names given to the same school, but 
in the course of time more than eighteen schools arose, 
and the various reports selected from among these, first 
ane and then another, in order to produce the number 
eighteen that had long been regarded as the established 
number. However, in spite of the lists not agreeing 
perfectly, we can, with sufficient certainty, discern several 
large groups of schools that are closely allied among one 
another. 

Which is the school, the texts of which we have before 
us in the Pali language? And with which other schools 
was it moet closely connected P 

According to the traditions of the Sinhalese, one of the 
schools possessed a claim to be considered as orthodox, on 
account of ita having held fast to the original tradition 
of the Тневлв (målstheravåda); of course the Sinhalese 
church considers itself as belonging to this party. That 
the name THeravini was not a mere title of honour which 
the followers of this school applied to themselves alone, 
but that their right to it was generally recognized, is evident 
from the fact that Hiouen Thsang also gives this name 
(^ Chang-tao-pou ") to the Sinhalese community. 

Now, in my opinion, it can be shown with tolerable 
certainty that this same school bore another name in ad- 
dition, that of the VipHassavåpi (Vibhajyavüdines). From 


t The historical pir of the great Atthakatb& of the Mabåvihåra form 
tho basis not only of thé historical statements of Buddhaghosa, but also of the 
histories Dipevamsa and Maháramsa. I intend to give a proof of thisin my 
edition of the Dipavamas. А 

3 Compare Wamiljew, i. с. Ё 249 f., Tåranåtha, Geschichte dos Buddhismus 
(German translation}, p. 270 ff. 
4 


XLII THE VIBHAJJAVADI BCHOOL. 


the reports of the northern Buddhists, more especially those 
of the Mahåsamghikåés and Sammatiyås,' we find, by the 
side of two other groups of schools? which are in close 
affinity, the following third group: the Sarvåstivådinas, 
VipHasvavåpInas, Mahigisakås, Dharmaguptakås, Kácya- 
ply&s Samkråntikås (by the side of the last we also find 
the Tåmracåttyås mentioned here, which seem to be 
identical with or clearly related to them). Now the his- 
torical literature of Ceylon corresponding with the above 
gives the following group: the Tøkravåpi, Mahimsåsakå, 
Sabbetthavàdi, Dhammaguttiká, Kassapiké, famkantiká, 
Suttavådi. If those names that are the same on both aides 
are left out, the result would most probably be the identity 
of the Theravádi with the Vibhajyevådinas. 

Now this probability, it seems to me, becornes a certainty 
by the account in the Mabåvams concerning the third 
Council held under King Asoka. Asoka caused large 
numbers of heterodox Bhikkhus to be expelled from the 
community, and finally asked the true believers: Which 
doctrine did Buddha himeelf proclaim? They answered : 
He was a Vismassavåpi. Whereupon the King turned to 
the Thera Moggaliputta :— 

vibhajjavüdi sambuddho hoti bhante ’ti aha во, 
thero AmA "ti eto.‘ 

The result seems certain: if the appellation Vibhajjavadt 
was known as the name of a school, and the Sinhalese 
tradition—and moreover in a passage where the point in 
question was to distinguish the true from the false doctrines 
—declared the founder of the church to be a Vibhajjavádi, 

‘twas eae alge ба» groups stand the Mahåmmghikds; in that of 
the other the Mere en bre 

Tarandtha, L c. p. 273. 


4 To the pamage quoted above I add the following words I have met with in a 
subscription given by the Mabåvihåra monks to the book of the аршы: 


ünam vibha раш (vibhajjavådtnam Р) Tamba pavpid 
БАТЕ sio inge in ts Introduction to the Práti- 
moksha, p. iz. 


THE THERAVAD! AND THE MAHfSÅSAKÅ. хип 


ft is clear that the Sinhalese recognized that school as the 
orthodox one, and reckoned themselves as belonging 
to it. 

A somewhat different statement is given by Fa Hian, 
who makes the express remark that the Vinaya used in 
Ceylon belonged to the Mahighsakás. This cannot be 
correct. For, in the first place, the Sinhalese themselves 
considered the Mahicåsakas as one of those secte which had 
gone off from the true faith ; and, secondly, Hiouen Thsang 
gives the sect which prevailed in Ceylon a different Chinese 
mame to that which he, as a rule, employs for the Ma- 
híg&snkas. Yet this, at least, seems to result from Fah Hian's 
statement: the Vinaya of the Mahicdaaka school must be 
remarkably like the version of the Vinayapitake handed 
down in Ceylon: Through the kindness of Mr. Вкл I 
have been enabled to make a beginning on the comparison 
of the two versions. The task of proving in detail the 
relation between the texts of the different schools must 
be reserved for future investigations; it can scarcely be 
doubted that a knowledge of the original form of the 
Vinaya will, in this way, be attained with as much cer- 
tainty as accuracy with regard to detail. It is self-evident 
that first of all the Chinese translations of the Vinaya- 
literature of several of the Buddhist schools must be 
examined in detail. Persons acquainted with the Chinese 
language, and who have асоевв to these works, will be eure 
to receive the thanks of all interested in the study of 
Buddbism for every communication with regard to these 
important literary documents. Meanwhile, however, it will 
at all events be of interest to inquirers in this domain to 
become acquainted at least with the arrangement of the 


1 Beal, Buddhist Pilgrims, p. 1 

2 Itis probably not accidental м: the Di; pines mentions the Mahirpsåsakå 
first among those schools which branched off from the Theravåds, and that the 
northern Buddhists also are in the habit of mentioning the Vibhajyavådinas and 
the Mabicåmkiås side by side. 


XLIV VINAYA OF THE-MAHISÅSAKA SCHOOL. 


Vinaya of the MahtcAsaka-school, and to be enabled to 
compare it with the Pali Vinaya. I shall, therefore, here 
communicate the remarks which Mr. Beal has had the 
kindness to send me relating to the Mahisåsaka-school, 
and I shall accompany these with notes, giving the cor- 
responding data relating to the Pali version. 

Mr. Beal writes : 

1. “There is no division of the Chinese version of the 
Buddhist Vinaya corresponding to that you name in the 
Pali! In the case of the Mahisdsakas, the first section of 
the First DIVISION is called Po-lo-i, $e. Рёгёјіка. The 
second section of the first division includes the 23 (13 P) 
Samghádisesa rules. The third section of the first division 
ie called Wou-teng, ie. the Anity& dhammá The fourth 
section of the first division is called Shi-sah, which I take 
to be = Nissaggiy&. The fifth section of the first division 
includes the 91 (92 ?) Pácittiya rulee. 

2. "The весомо DIVISION includes eight rules for the 
Bhikkhunis, called the eight Påråjika rules. Tho remain- 
ing sections of this division contain rules for the Bhikkhants 
similar to those for the Bhikkhus. 

3. “The THIRD DIVISION contains, Ist, A LIFE OF BUDDHA," 
2nd, Rules for ordination, residence during rainy season, 
etc. This evidently corresponds to the Manivacea of the 
Pali. 

4. "THE FOURTH DIVISION contains, lst, a section called 
Mih-teang, s.e. Adhikerana-samaths, rules for avoiding 
litigation, and 2nd, rules for holding sessions of priests 
(Samgha-kamma).* 

5. THE FIFTH DIVISION contains miscellaneous rules, and 


V This is the division into the five works Parajika, etc. 

* As yet all the data agree exactly with the Pali Vibhangs, except that no 
mention is here made of the short chapters which in the Pali redaction come in 
alter the Pacittiya. 

3 This corresponda with the first chapters of the Pali Mabaragga. 

* This corresponds with the fret fonr Khandhas of the Cullavagga. 


VINAYA OF THE MAHISÅSAKA SCHOOL. XLY 


evidently agrees with the Pali Parivárs.! Under this last 
division, we have in Chinese the history of the Councils. 

* In order to test the identity of the Pali and Chinese 
versions, I will now give an outline of the first division, 
as it is found in the ManísásAKA school 

“The FIRST SECTION commences with a reason why the 
teaching of former Buddhas had not endured, viz. that 
like flowers, when not well fastened together, are scattered 
by the wind, во the teaching of Buddhs, if not systemati- 
cally arranged and bound together in order, would soon be 
dispersed by the opposition of enemies and heretics. 

"Buddha then accepts the invitation of a Brahman, 
called Pi-lan-jo (Verafija), to partake of hospitality during 
the three months of wass. The Brahman forgets to fulfil 
his engagements, being immersed in bodily enjoyments ; at 
the end of the three months Buddha goes to him and 
reproves him for his neglect.* 

“Buddha then proceeds with his followers to the neigh- 
bourhood of Vaieli, and here begins an account of the 
transgressions against the Law meriting expulsion. 

1. "The sin of Sudáns Karandaputra,? who, having 
become a disciple, was tempted by his wife to abjure his 
vows of chastity. 

2. “The story of a Bhikkhu* and a female monkey. 

3. “A story about going to festivals and dances given 
by non-believere.^ 

Mors likely this section co inde with the second half of the Callavagga, 
and а section со ding with the Parivårs is wanting in the Chinese Vinaya. 
The story of the Councils which Mr. Beal mentions will be foand in the Tali 
"ыа, at the end of the Cullavagga. А 

a this со nds exactly with the Introduction to the Vibhaüga; the 
comparison also of the flowers which are scattered by the wind, is made use of in 
the Pali tert. 

< Tens kho pana mmayenr sñiñataro bikkhe Vesdliyam Mabávane makdati 

a дуа! Vi 
Amisens upulåpetvå шай methunam dhammuun patisevati, ete m 

* ] do not find anything exactly correspon: with this in the Pali text. 
Perhaps the following is the meant : tena kho pana samayens sambahulå 
Velika Yaj рана bbikkhå yávedattham bhuiijirsu; yávadattbam süpimso, 
yåvedattham naháyimsu, yåvadattham bhufijità , . . ayoniso mapssikaritvå 

. . methunam dhammam patiserimsu. 


иті VINAYA OF THE MAHISASAKA SCHOOL. 


4. “Specific transgressions, and their degree and guilt. 

b. "The story of Danaka,' a potter's son, whose wooden 
house having been destroyed by thieves, he built him a 
large stone house, which Buddha ordered to be pulled down. 

6. “The story of a Rishi who was annoyed by the 
visits of a Någaråje. Bodhisstva ordered the Rishi to ask 
the Naga for the Mani-gem concealed in his crest, on 
which the Någa ceased to come to the Rishi. This story 
concludes with a gåthå : 


‘Men do not like beggars, and Ше коп learn to hate them, 
The Nâgarija hearing words of begging went away and never 
returned.’ ? 


“The SECOND SECTION of this division is taken up with 
stories about Devadatta.? 

«The other sections are occupied with stories relating 
to the subjects discussed in them, viz. with reference to 
clothes, medicines, bedding and other matters. 

“The sECOND DIVISION, relating to nuns,‘ is occupied by 
stories and instances of a similar character as those in the 
first division. 

“The THIRD DIVISION is occupied by а life of Buddha, 
from his election in tbe time of Dipamkara down to the 
converaion of Såriputra and Moggallåna.” 5 

So far Mr. Beal's communication in connexion with the 
Vinaya of the Mahigåaakås. 


1 Dhaniyo kumbhakåraputta (second Påråjika). 
* This story belongs to the second Samghådisesa dhamma. That the 
who advised the Rishi was the Bodhisatva himself is not e: Йу stated; in fact, 
it seoms that in the earlier texts the stories related there of past times (* bhüta- 
pubbem ") were only in few cases connected with Buddha himself, and with the 
persons surrounding him, whereas this invariably happens in the Játaka collec- 
tion. The verse А as follows : iss ада 
* na tam yáce yama piyam jigimse, vi oti ati 
nago mayim yåcito bráhmapens adamanafi бета tad ajj t'u.” 
з Bimilar stories occur in the Pali taxt in the discusion af the 10th and 11th 
bådisere dhamma. 
а This hunt vibien th introductory chapter of the Mah&vagge. Th 
corresponds wi e in! chapter o! e 
in it does not begin with an sccount of Buddha's previous existences, but 
begins with the time when he attained the dignity of а Buddha, It extends, like 
the Chinese version, to the conversion of the two Agyasåvaka. 


DIFFERENT VERSIONS OF THE VINAYA. XLVII 


Of the Tibet Vinaya, the Vinaya of the MahAsarvåsti- 
vådinas, we have the well-known detailed extracts of 
Csoma Körösi.! A comparison of the statements of these 
two scholars relating to the texts that have been examined 
by them, with the РАШ Vinaya, leads with perfect certainty 
to the following conclusion : 

All of the different versions of the Vinaya are based upon 
one foundation; the arrangement of the material is the 
same in all; а large portion of the etories interwoven in 
the text correspond in all It has been pointed out above, 
that of the elements which constitute the Vibhaöga 
the narrative portions were added last; the addition of 
these stories was made at an earlier period than that 
in which the differences of the various schools arose. Even 
the story of the first two Councile—which is clearly the 
part of the Pali Vinaya last composed, is also met with 
at the exactly corresponding place in the Vinaya of the 
Mahigåsakas, and of the Mahåssrvåstivådinas. 

Hitherto, I have been unable to discover any traces’ in 
the Pali Vinaya that the original text common to ALL 
the various versions of the Vinaya has here experienced 
any kind of alterations; and more particularly we find 
here no kind of interpolations showing special refer- 
ence to Ceylon.” The diction also and the archaic 
colouring of the language is the same throughout the 
whole Pali Vinaya; the easily recognizable and charac- 
teristio peculiarities of the later works admitted into the 
Tipitaka, and still more of the Atthakathås, are altogether 
foreign to this Vinaya. Thus it seems to me very possible, 
and even probable, that the Påli version represents the 
кий е ta Stirs terre ы ШЕ 
(Buddhismus, p. 96). mu 

% Of the Sinhalese works, known to me, and which discuss Buddha's first 
actions after he became а Buddha, not one omits mentioning his attention to 


Lanka. The Maha; although it treats of the same portion of Baddha's 
life, knows nothing of Qs. "ө 


XLVIII THE PALI VERSION OF THE VINAYA. 


Vinaya in its original form, as it existed before the sepa- 
ration of the schools, and that the claim of the Sinhalese 
fraternity to possess the true Theravåda is well-founded. 
With regard to the two other schools, we can perceive 
the existence of later additions even in the short quota- 
tions from them which are all we as yet possess. These 
additions are by no means altogether unknown to the 
Sinhalese church, but they have there been placed in the 
Atthakathås, so that the text of the Tipitaka, as preserved 
in Ceylon, has remained free from them. 


With regard to the contents and the style of repre- 
sentation, the Pali version has hitherto shown itself to be 
the most original, if not (Ae original version. But it 
may with certainty be maintained that in one respect, in 
reference to the dialect, it differs from the original text. 
No one acquainted with the earliest history of Buddhism 
will entertain any doubt that the fundamental constituent 
parts of its sacred texts were first fixed in the kingdom 
of Magadha, and in the Mágadhi language. It is certain 
that the Páli language is not the Mágadhi langunge, and 
it is unnecessary here to repeat the proofs which do not 
leave the smallest room for doubt. Now, in the Culla- 
vagga it is said that Buddha Һай decreed that every one 
should learn the eacred texts in his own language.’ This 
story will scarcely induce us to believe that such a decree 
proceeded from Buddha himself; however, it follows from 
this story with the greater certainty—what is of more 
importance for us—that at the time when the holy texts 


1 Compare, E. Kuhn, Beitráge sur Påli-Grammatik, p. 7. Little as we can 
believe that in the Pali we have the Magadhi language itself, as little can we 
aasume that tbe Buddhist texts were originally brought to Ceylon in Mågadbi, 
and that there, under the influence of the Sinhalese, the language became chan, 
into its present form, known as the Pali language; for the ancient Ginbalese 
language—as we at present know it from inscriptions—a, with the Mågadht 
in some of those very points which distinguish the М i from the Pili. 

* anujánámi bhikkhave sskåya niruttiyà buddhevacanam pariyåpupitun ti. 


. THE PALI LANGUAGE. XLIX 


of the Buddhists were spread over India, they were cer- 
tainly not handed over to the different parts of India in 
the Mågadhi language, but in the vernacular dialect pecu- 
liar to the several districts. It is probable that if the 
Buddhist doctrines had, at that period, been adopted in 
Ceylon also, and that the texts also had, at that time, been 
brought over to Ceylon, the old Sinhalese language would 
have been the one used there for these texts, in the same 
way ag the various Indian dialects were used throughout 
India. 

The course of events was, in fact, a different one. Tho 
Tipitaka was transplanted to Ceylon at a time when the 
tradition of the holy texts had lost the character of elas- 
ticity which allowed every one to take Buddhs’s words, 
and to adapt them to his own language. A beginning 
had already been made not only to watch over the sub- 
stance of the words, but over the very letters themselves— 
over Nama, Liiiga aud Parikkháre, as is said in the Dipa- 
vamss. Thus Ceylon received the sacred traditions in the 
language of (Aat part of India from which the Tipitaka 
was brought over to the island, and in this same language 
—which consequently became the sacred language of the 
Buddhist community in Ceylon—the Sinhalese continued 
to propagate the tradition. 

This language is the Pai. But to what part of India 
did the РАН originally belong, and from whence did it 
spread to Ceylon? There are two paths open for this 
investigation. By discussing the historical tradition one 
can inquire from which part of India Ceylon obtained its 
knowledge of the Buddhist literature; and secondly, on 
the basis of the ancient inscriptions, we may ask to what 
geographical limita the grammatical peculiarities are con- 
fined which distinguish the Pali language from the other 
popular dialects of India? If no error is made in the 
inquiry, the resulta obtained from these two paths must 


L THE DIALECT OF UJJENI. 


agree. Our investigation will take up the first of these 
paths, and be continually controlled by the results that 
present themselves on the second of the two. 

The tradition of the Sinhalese, we know, connects the 
conversion of the island to the Buddhist belief with the 
name of Mahinds (Mahendra), the son of King Asoka, 
The Mahåvamea ! gives some details concerning the descent 
and the birth of Mahinda. When Asoka, as a young 
prince, left for Ujjeni, in order, at hia father’s command, 
to undertake the regency of the country of Avanti, he, 
on his way thither, and in the city of Cetiya—also called 
Vidiss—married the daughter of a Setthi, and in Ujjent 
she gave birth to Mahinda. Asoka resided in Ujjent 
for ten years after the birth of Mahinda, but upon his 
father's death he removed to Påtaliputta, and undertook 
the government of the whole kingdom. It is probable— 
as probable as the whole account itself—that young Ma- 
hinda lived in Ujjeni with his father till the latter became 
TEE 

On these data, Westergaard,’ and with him E. Kuhn,’ 
have assumed that Mahinda, when he spread the Buddhist 
doctrines to Ceylon, made use of the language of his 
native country, and that consequently the Pali was the 
dialect of Ujjent. 

This hypothesis seams to me to possess but little prob- 
ability. For even though we credit the statements of the 
historical books of the Sinhalese regarding the life of 
Mahinda, it is little in keeping with these to assume that 
the Prince made use of the Ujjent dialect for his religious 
work Mahinda joined the Buddhist Samgha in his 
twentieth year, six years after his father’s being anointed, 


1 Turnour's edition, p. 78. 
3 P aad den. asltesten Zeitraum der indischen Geschichte (German tranalation, 
P? 5 Beitrage sur Páli- Grammatik, p. 7. 


MAHINDA AND THE PALI LANGUAGE. LI 


ten years after the beginning of his father's reign. It 
is hardly conceivable that he should have studied the 
literature of Buddhism in the language of his child- 
hood, at & time when he had evidently for long lived 
at the royal court in Pataliputta, and that he should not 
rather have become acquainted with the works in the 
language of the court, it being, moreover, the lan- 
guage in which Buddha himself originally had taught his 
people. 

Another difficulty presents itself. We are not yet 
acquainted, .by inscriptions, with the Ujjeni dialect itself. 
But we have a safe support in the inscriptions of Bhilsa, 
which is identical with Vidisa, the home of Mahinda’s 
mother. A lively intercourse was carried on between 
the town of Vidisa and the not very distant city of 
Ujjent, as we learn from the numerous inscriptions found 
at Vidisa relating to citizens of Ujjent. The dialect of 
the inscriptions of Bhilsa, however, differs in too many 
essential points from the Påli for us to regard it as in 
any way likely that the РАШ language originated in this 
part of India. 

Thus there are difficulties that cannot be overcome as 
long as we consider the traditions of the Pali Tipitaka 
as connected with the person of MamunDa; it ie im- 
possible both to identify the РАН with the language of 
Mahinda's youth and with the court language of his 
paternal home. 

A fundamental mistake in the investigation seems to me 
to lie in the fact of their making Mahinda play во decisive a 
part. In fact, it cannot by any means, with the requisite 
strictness, be considered as sufficiently attested, that Mahinda 
brought the sacred texta to Ceylon. 

Asoka’s own inscriptions tell na that in the reign of this 
monarch steps were taken to propagate his beneficent maxims 


I Beo Cunningham, The BAisa Topes, р. 95. 


LIT THE STORY OF MAHINDA. 


in a number of other countries, and also in Ceylon;! con- 
sidering Asoka’s well-known position towards Buddhism, it is 
also very likely that the missionaries who, at his instigation, 
went to Ceylon, were Buddhists, And hence, in all probability, 
the stories of the Sinhalese concerning Mahinda may contain 
some germ of historical truth. This germ, however, has 
become surrounded by a coating of inventions which render 
it impossible to place any faith in the traditions of Mahinda. 
Prince Mahinda himself, as the founder of the Ceylonese 
Bhikkhusamgha, the Princess SamghamittA, his sister, as 
the foundress of the Bhikkhunisamghs, the stories about 
bringing over the relics and the Bodhi-branch :—all this 
looks like а tissue of a little truth and a great deal of 
fiction, invented for the purpose of possessing a history of 
the origin of the Buddhist institutions in the island, and 
to connect it with the most distinguished person conceivable 
—the great Asoka. The historical legend is fond of poeti- 
cally exalting ordinary occurrences into great and brilliant 
actions; we may assume that, in reality, many things were 
accomplished in a more gradual and less striking manner 
than such legends make them appear. Whatever we may 
choose to think about the Buddhist impulses that are said to 
have reached Ceylon from the court of Asoka, in my opinion 
the naturalization of the whole great Buppniet LITERATURE 
in the ialand of Ceylon does not look as if it had been 
brought about by the sudden appearance of missionaries 
from the Magadha kingdom, but as if it were the fruit of 
& period of long and continued intercourse between Ceylon 
and the edjacent parts of Indis. It is self-evident that, 
at all times, there must have been a greater amount of 
intercourse between Ceylon and the peninsula of the Deccan 
— more particularly the countries along the shore—than 
between Ceylon and Hindostan. Those acquainted with the 
ancient records relating to Ceylon will know of numerous 


1 Becond rock edict; Corpus Inseript. p. 66. 


THE LANGUAGE OF THE DECCAN. Lin 


proofs with regard to the relations in which Ceylon stood 
to the kingdom of Kalinga, and in such а case we should 
scarcely require any express proofs at all. The Kalinga 
country, or one of the adjacent kingdoms of Southern India, 
seems to me to have the most claim to having been the medium 
for transplanting the Buddhist literature into Ceylon. 

In corroboration of this conjecture, I appeal, in the first 
place, to the geographical distribution of the Buddhist 
schools in India, according to the statements of Носех 
TusawG. The followers of the Sthavira school (Chang-tao- 
pou), which predominated in Ceylon, are not mentioned by 
the Chinese traveller as met with in those parts of northern 
India, which have to be regarded as the true seat of ancient 
Indian civilization. The chief seats of this school—apart 
from Ceylon—are situated on the eastern shores of India, 
beginning at the mouths of the Ganges, and southwards, in 
the dominion of the Kalinga and in the country of the 
Dravida; further, on the west coast in those parts which 
also stood in connexion with Ceylon, in Bharukaccha and 
Surfishtra ;? in the Malaya kingdom the school is not ex- 
presaly named, but mention is made of а monastery said to 
have been founded by Mahinda.‘ It may be added that the 
same school aleo, probably, had its seats in the dorninion of 
the Andhra, the neighbours of the Kaliiga. Buddhaghosa 
frequently speaks of the views expressed in the Atthakathå 
of the Andhra, eo that it is a very likely supposition that the 


1 Burnouf-Lasseu, Essai sur le Pali, p. 44; Mogasthenes, ей. Schwanbeck, 
rue MaAáósequa, p. 241; Journ. Hey. As. Soc. N.B. vol. vii. p. 160 and 
ollowing. 

* To this there is but one exception, which is, however, only an apparent one. 
There was at бата, in сеге ш of the oe apo Sr 

longing to the schoo! -t80 . Tha. iiL p. 487 e æg.), bat it 
been founded by а Сеуіопеве Lng? and always remained in connexion with 
Ceylon. This monastery is of interest from the fact that in al] probability it bas 
played an important part in the life of Buddhsghoes. He was born "bodhimanda- 
вага i" (Маћётатиа, Ri 250); the place where he received tho instigation to 
travel to Ceylon was most likely this very monastery. 

3 H. The. iii. pp. 82, 92, 119, 164, 165. 

* Ibid. p. 121. 


LIV SOUTH INDIAN INSCRIPTIONS. 


Atthakathå of the Andhra referred to the same redaction of 
the texta to which Buddhaghoes made a commentary.) 

Perhaps, when we possess а larger number of ancient 
inscriptions from the Kingdoms of the Andhra, Kaliöga, 
and neighbouring tribes, we shall with greater certainty be 
enabled to determine which was the original home of the 
Pali language. But even the inscriptions to which I, at 
present, have access, in my opinion, justify the assertion 
that the home of the Påli language muat, for better reasons, 
be looked for more to the south than to the north of the 
Vindhye mountains, Look at the inscription of the mother 
of Såtakanni) King of the Anpina, found at Nasik, or the 
important, but unfortunately, as yet, partially unintelligible 
rock-insoription of Aira Máhameghaváhana, King of the 
Katina, discovered in Khandagiri. It will be found that 
the differences between the dialect of these inscriptions and 
the Pali are not greater than can readily be explained from 
casualties relating to the different manner in which the 
texts were handed down on both sides,‘ 

What I have said above will, I hope, give a certain 
probability to my supposition that the version of the 
Tipitaka preserved in Ceylon and ite dialect the Pali 
were brought to the island from the peninsula of South 
India, probably from the kingdoms of the Andhra or 
Kalifiga. In this way we lose, it is true, a fixed date for 
this event, such as is given in the story about Mahinda; 
мум in ha Introduction to Dui Pritunchaha (p. vil ada. 11) would han D 


a different view. 
a uis 26 of the inscriptions collected by West (Journ. Roy. As. Boc. Bombay, 


å Corpus Insorig. Plate XVII 

* There is an in i example, by which it can be shown that in one 
instance at least an epparen between the orth phy be РШ 
and that of the inscriptions did not exist at the time of 
introduced into Pali at a later period ; ib speling 3 of ie РШ өнә e) ae), 
Dave made use cl the selling M, in ipot ng Ше roa as o the PAN lang langage 
have made use of the in dispa age of the 
Thus it $e an rir eller wm iet that Kamayasa not write dibbete, but divrate 
(vi. 2, 10, p. 


CHRONOLOGY OF THE VINAYA. LV 


we have no longer any right to regard Asoka’s reign as 
precisely the date of the separation of the northern and 
southern tradition of the Tipitaka. The events which, 
according to our view of the matter, take the place of 
Mahinda’s journey as a missionary, namely, the school 
Chang-tso-pou becoming naturalized in Southern India, 
more especially in the countries on the coasts, and its 
doctrines spreading to Ceylon, are such as do not admit 
as yet of any chronological determination. However, our 
investigations regarding the origin of the Vinaya offer 
some compensation for the chronological supports that are 
lost. If the view put forth above is correct—according 
to which the first four portions of our version of the 
Vinaya received the fixed form in which we now possess 
them about а century and а half before the time of 
Asoka, except as regards the disleot—there can scarcely 
be any great cause for lamenting the loss of those other 
chronological data. 

It cannot be a matter of indifference to any branch of the 
inquiries into the development of the ancient Indian mind, 
whether we can safely assume the origin of a collection 
of works of such great compass and of such varied sub- 
stance as the Buddhist Vinaya, to have been a century 
and a half earlier than the origin of those literary 
documents which were hitherto believed the oldest of 
those, the origin of which can be traced to a certain time. 
May those eminent scholare who have solved many a tough 
problem in the domain of РАШ and of the Buddhist 
literature, lend us their assistance in leading the inves- 
tigations which these observations are desired to excite, 
to safe conclusions! 


Before I conclude, I beg to express my sincere thanks 
to the Royal Academy of Sciences in Berlin and to the 
India Office in London, by whose support I have been 


LVI CHRONOLOGY OF THE VINAYA. 


enabled to publish this work. The India Office Library, 
the Royal Library in Berlin, and, at the request of the 
German Imperial Foreign Office, the Bibliothéque Nationale 
in Paris, have, with the utmost kindness, placed at my 
disposal the manuscripts upon which the edition is based. 
I beg to expreas my gratitude also to the high authorities 
and to the administrators of these libraries. 


Tuz Еров. 


Barun, 
May, 1879. 


VINAYAPITAKAM. 


MAHAVAGGA. 


Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammåsambuddhassa. 


I. 


Tena samayena buddho bhagavå Uruvelåyam viharati 
najjå Nerafljeråya tire bodhirukkhamüle pathamábhisam- 
buddho. atha kho bhagavå bodhirukkhaemåle sattåham eka- 
pellaükena nisidi vimuttiseukhapatisamvedi. |11 atha kho 
bhagavå rattiyà pathamam yåmam paticcasamuppddam 
anulomapatilomam manas’ ákási: avijjåpaccayå samkhárá, 
samkhårapaccayå уїйййраш, уіййАпарассауё n&marüpam, 
пйшагйрарассауй salàyatanam, sal&yatanapaccay&  phnaso, 
phassapaccayå vedanå, vedanåpaccayå tanhü, tanhápacceyü 
upådånam, орёйёперессвуё bhavo, bhavapaccaya jåti, jåti- 
paccayå jaråmaranam soksparidevadukkhadomanassupåyåså 
sambhavanti. evam etassa kevalasss dukkhakkhandhassa 
samudayo hoti. avijjáya tv eva asesaviráganirodhà samkhá- 
ranirodho, samkhåranirodhå vififidnanirodho, vififiånanirodhå 
nåmarfipanirodho, námarüpanirodhá sa]áyatananirodho, ва]й- 
yatananirodhå phassanirodho, phassanirodbå vedanånirodho, 
vedanånirodhå tanhånirodho, tanhånirodhå upådånanirodho, 
upådånanirodhå bhavanirodho, bhavanirodhé jåtinirodho, jåti- 
nirodhá jaråmsranem sokaparidevadukkhadomenassupåyåså 
nirujjhanti. evam etassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa 


VOL. HL 1 


9 MAHAVAGGA. [L. 1. 2-8. 2. 


nirodho hotiti. 121 atha kho bhagavá etam attham viditvå 


{Фуат velåyam imam udánam udánesi : 


yadå have pütubhavanti dhammå åtåpino jbåyato bråh- 
manassa 
ath’ assa kankhá vapayanti sabbå yato pajånåti sahetu- 
dhamman ti. ||3]] 
atha kho bhagavå rattiyå majjhimam yåmem paticca- 
samuppådam anulomapatilomam manas’ åkåsi: avijjåpaceayå 
samkhårå, samkhårapaccayå vififiånam, viññánapaceayá nå- 
mardpam—la—evam etassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa 
samudayo hoti — pa — nirodho hotiti. |141 atha kho bhagava 
etam attham viditvå tåyam velåyam imam udånam udånesi : 


yadå have påtubhaventi dhammå åtåpino jhåyato bráh- 
manassa 

ath’ assa kenkhá vapayanti sabbå yato khayam paccayå- 
nem evediti. (151 


athe kho bhagavå rettiyå pacchimam yåmam paticca- 
samuppádam anulomepatilomam manas’ åkåsi : avijjåpsccayå 
samkhårå, samkhårapaccayå vififidnam — gha — evam etassa 
kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti — pa — nirodho 
hotiti. |61 atha kho bhagavå etam attham viditvå tåyam 
velåyam imam udánam udánesi : 


yadå have påtubhavanti dhammå åtåpino jhåyato bráh- 


manassa 
vidhåpayem titthati Mårasenam suriyo 'va obbåsayam 
antalikkhan ti. [17]! 


bodhikath& nittbitå. [1] 


athe kho bhagavå sattáhassa accayena tamhá samådhimhå 
vutthahitvå bodhirukkhamålå yena Ajapålanigrodho ten’ 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvå Ajepålanigrodberukkhemfile 
sattüham ekapallankena nisidi vimuttisukhapatisamvedi. [|1|| 
atha kho afiüatero huhunkajátiko br&áhmano yena bha- 
gavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bbegavatà saddhim 
sammodi, sammodaniyam katham sáraniyam vitisåretvå ekam- 
antam otthåsi, ekamantam thito kho so bráhmano bhaga- 


1.8. 24.2] MAHÅVAGGA. 3 


vantam etad avoca: kittåvatå nu kho bho Gotama bråh- 
таро hoti katame ca pana bráhmapakaranà dhammå ’ti. || 2 || 
atha kho bhagavå etam attham viditvå tåyam velåyam imam 
udánam udáneei : 
yo bråhmano båhitapåpadhammo nihnhunko nikasåvo 
yatatto 
vedantagü vusitabrehmacariyo, dhammena so brahmano 
brahmavådam vadeyya, 
yass’ ussadå n' atthi kuhiñoi lake "ti. [|3]! 
Ajap&lekathá nitthitå. 1211 


atha kho bhagav& sattáhassa accayena tamhà samådhimbå 

vutthehitvà Ajap&lanigrodhamül& yena Mucalindo ten’ 
upesamkami, upesamkamitvà Mucalindamile sattåham eka- 
pellankena nisidi vimuttisukhapatisamvedi. |11 tena kho 
рапа samayena mshåakålsmegho udapådi aattdhavaddalika 
sitavåtaduddini. atha kho Mucalindo någaråjå sakabhavanå 
nikkbamitvå bhagavato kåyam sattakkhattum bhogehi pa- 
rikkhipitvå upari muddhani mahentam pbepam ksritvå 
atthdsi: må bhagavantam sitam, må bhagavantam unham, 
må bhegaventam damsemakasavåtåtapesirimsspasamphesso 
"ti. [2р atha kho Mucalindo någaråjå sattåhasss accayena 
viddbam vigatavalåhakem devam viditvå bhagavato kåyå 
bhoge vinivethetvå sakavannam patisamheritvà mágavaka- 
vangem abhinimminitvà bhagavato purato atthåsi afijeliko 
bhagaventam namassemåno. ||3|| athe kho bhagavé etam 
attham viditvå tåyam velåyam imam udánam udánesi : 

sukho viveko tutthassa sutadhammassa passato, 

avyApajjham sukham loke r^-3bhütesu samyamo.| 

sukhå virågatå loke kåmån. . samatikkamo, 

asmimánasaa yo vinayo etap ve paramam sukhan ti. |i4 || 

Mucalindekathå nitthita. |8] 


atha kho bhagavå sattáhassa accayena tambå samådhimbå 
vutthahitvà Mucalindamül& yena Råjåystenam ten’ upa- 
samkami, upasamkamitvå Rájáyatanamüle sattaham eks- 
pallankena nisidi vimuttisukhepatisamvedi. |11 tena kho 


4 MAHAVAGGA. [1.4 2-8. 2. 


рапа ватауепа Tapussabhallik& vånijå Ukkalé tam 
desam eddhånamaggapetipannå honti. atha kho Tapussa- 
bhallikánam vånijånam flåti sålobitå devatà Tapussabhallike 
vanije etad avoca: ayam måriså bhagavå Råjåyatanamfle 
viharati patbamåbhissmbuddho, gacchatha tam bhaga- 
vantam manthena ca madhupindikåya са patimånetha, tam 
vo bhavissati digharattam hitåya sukhåyå "ti. |2|| atha kho 
Tapussabhalliká vånijå manthañ са madhupipdikafi ca Adaya 
Jena bhagavé ten’ upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitvá bhaga- 
vantam abhivådetvå ekamantam atthamsu, ekamantam thitå 
kho Tapussabhalliké vånijå bhagaventam etad avocum : peti- 
ganbåtu no bhante bhagavå manthafi ca madhupindikafi ca 
yam smhåkam assa digharattam hit&ya sukhåyå "ti. ||3]] 
atha kho bhagavato etad ahosi: na kho tathagaté hattheeu 
patiganhanti. kimbi nu kho aham patiganheyyam menthafi 
ca madhupindikefi cå 'ti. atha kho cattåro Mahåråjåno 
bhagavato cetasá cetoparivitakkam afifiåya catuddiså cattåro 
selamaye patte bhagavato upanåmesum: idha bbante bhegavå 
patiganhátu manthafi ca madhupindikefi cá ti. patiggahesi 
bhagavå paccagghe selamaye patte manthafi ca madhupindi- 
kañ ca patiggahetva ca paribhoiiji. |4]| atha kho Tepusss- 
bhallikà vånijå bhagavantam ouitapattapånim viditvå bhaga- 
veto pådesu siraså nipatitvå bbagavantam etad avocum : ete 
mayam bhante bhagavantam samnam gacchåma dhammañ 
ca, upåsake no bhagavå dhåretu ajjatagge pånupete sarepam 
gate 'ti. teva loke pathamam upüsaká ahesum dvevå- 
eikå. 161 
Råjåyatanekathå nitthitå. 141 


atha kho bhagavå asttábassa accayena tamhå samådhimbå 
vutthahitvå Rájáyatanamtlá yena Ajapálanigrodho ten’ 
upasamkami, upasamkemitvé tatra видат bhagsvå AjapAlani- 
grodhamüle viharati. |1] atha kho bhagavato rahogstassa 
patisallinassa evam oetaso parivitakko udapådi: adhigato 
kho my дуст dhammo gambhiro duddaso duranubodho santo 
panito atakkåvacaro nipuno panditavedaniyo. ñlayarámñ kho 
pandyam рајё ålayaretå ålsyasammuditå. álsyerámáye kho 
pana pejáya åleyaratåya &layasammuditàya duddasam idam 


1.5.2-7.] MAHÅVAGGA. Б 


thånam yad idam idappaoceyatå paticcasamuppádo, idam pi 
kho thånam sududdasam yed idam sabbasamkhárasamatho 
sabbüpadhipstinissaggo tanhakkhayo virågo nirodho nibbå- 
nam. аһай ceva kho pana dhammam deseyyam pere ca me na 
Ajåneyyum, so mam’ assa kilamatho, så mam’ assa viheså 
"ti. 121 spi 'ssu bhagevantam imå anacchariyá gåthåyo 
patibhamsu pubbe assutapubbå : ; 


kicchens me edhigatam halam dáni pakåsitum, 
rågadosaparetebi nåyam dhammo susambudho.| : 
petisotagámi nipupam gambhiram duddesam apum 
rågarattå na dakkhanti tamokhandhens &vut ’ti. |18 | 


iti ha bhagavato patissficikkhato appossukketåya oittam 
namati no dhammadesanåys. athe kho Brahmuno Baham- 
patisss bhagavato oetaså cetoperivitakkam aññåya etad ahosi : 
nassati vata bho loko, vinassati vata bho loko, yatra hi nama 
tathágstassa arahato sammüsambuddhassa appossukkatüya 
cittam namati no dhammadesandya 'ti. ||4|| atha kho 
Brahmå Sahampati, seyyathápi náma belavå puriso sam- 
miñjitam và büham pasåreyya pasüritam vå båham sammi- 
fijeyya, evam eva Brahmaloke antarahito bhagavato purato 
páturahosi. |61 atha kho Brabmå Sahampati ekamsam utta- 
råsangam karitvå dakkhinafi jånumandalam pathaviyam ni- 
hantvå yena bhagavå ten’ afljalim  papåmetvå bhagavantam 
etad avoca: desetu bhante bhagavå dhammam, desetu sugato 
dhammam, santi sattå apparsjakkhejåtiké essavanaté dham- 
massa parihåyanti, bbevissanti dhammasea айїйїїйгө ’ti. [6 [| 
idam avoca Brahma Sahampati, idam vatvå athåparam etad 


avoca : 


påturahosi Magadhesu pubbe dhammo asuddho eamalebi 
cintito, 

spápur etam amatassa dvåram eupantu dhammam vima- 
lenånubuddbam.| 

sele yathå pabbatamuddhini thito yathåpi passe janetam 
samantato, 

tath’ üpamam dhsmmamayam sumedha påsådam åruyha 
samantacakkhu 


8 MAHAVAGGA. (1. 8. 7-12. 


sokavatinnafi janatam epetasoko avekkhassu jåtijaråbhi- 
bhitam.| 

utthehi vira vijitesamgáma satthavåhe anane vicara loke, 

desetu bhagavé dhammam afiflåtåro bbavissantiti. ||7 [| 


evam vutte bhagavå Brahmånam Sahampatim etad avoca: 
mayham, kho Brahme etad ahosi: adhigato kho my Ayam 
dhammo gambhiro duddaso duranubodho . . . så mam’ азаа 
viheså "ti, api ‘ssa mam Brahme imå anaccheriyå gåthåyo 
patibbamsa pubbe me assutapubbå . . . åvutå 'ti. iti ha 
me Brahme patisaficikkhato appossukkatáys cittam namati 
no dbammadeeanáyá "ti. ||8 |j 

dutiyam pi kho Brahmé Sehampati bbagavantam etad 
avoca: desetu bhante bbsgavá dhammam . . . aññêtåro 
bhavissantiti. dutiyam pi kho bhagavé Brahmånam Baham- 
petim etad avoca: mayham pi kho Brahme etad ahosi: 
adhigato kho my öyam dbammo gambhiro duddaso duranu- 
bodho . . . så mam’ assa viheså 'ti. api ‘asa mam Brahme 
imå anacchariyå gåtbåyo patibhamsu pubbe me assutspubbå 
+ + + Åvutå 'ti iti ha me Brahme patisaficikkhato appossu- 
kkatåya cittam namati no dhammadesanåyå "ti. |19 || 

tatiyam pi kho Вгаһшё Sahampati bhagavantam otad 
avoca: desetu bhante bhagavà dhammam ... . afifiåtåro 
bhaviseantiti. athe kho bhagavå Brahmuno ca ajjhesanam _ 
viditvå sattesu ca küruilüatam patioca buddbacakkhunå lo- 
kam volokesi. addasa kho bhagavå buddhacakkhunå lokam 
volokento satte apparajakkhe msbårsjakkhe tikkhindriye 
mudindriye evåkåre dvåkåre suvififiåpaye duvififlåpaye appe- 
kacoe paralokavajjabhayedassåvino viharante. 1101 seyya- 
thåpi nåma uppaliniyam va paduminiyam va pundarikiniyam 
và appeksocáni uppelåni vå padumani vå pundarikåni và 
udake jåtåni udake samvaddháni udakånuggatåni antoni- 
muggsposini, appekaccAni uppalani vå padumáni vå pundar!- 
kåni vå udake jåtåni идеке samveddhåni samodakan thitáni, 
вррекассёпі uppaláni và padumåni vå pupdartkani và udake 
jåtåni udake samveddhåni udakå accuggamme thitåni anupa- 
littåni udakena, ||ll|| evam eva bhagavé buddhacakkhunü 
lokam volokento addasa satte apparajakkhe mahdrajakkhe 


1. 5. 12-8. 6.J MAHÁVAGGA. 7 


tikkhindriye mudindriye svåkåre dvåkåre suvififidpaye duvi- 
йїйАрауе eppekaoce peralokavajjabhayadass&vino viharante, 
disvána Brahmánam Sahampatim gátháya ajjhabháai : 


apårutå tesam amatassa dvårå ye sotavanto, pamuficantu 
saddham. 

vihimeamfifli pagunam па bhási dhammam panitam mann- 
jesu Brahme "ti. ||12 || 


atha kho Brahmå Sahampati katåvakåso kho "mhi bbagavatå 
dhammadesanåyå ”ti bhagavantam abbivådetvå padakkhinam 
katvå tatth’ ev’ antaradhéyi. [1181 

Brahmayåoanakathå nitthità. 1511 


atha kho bhagavato etad ahosi: kassa nu kho aham patha- 
mam dhammam deseyyam, ko imam dhammam khippam eva 
Ajdnissatiti. аһа kho bhagavato etad ahosi: ayam kho 
Alåro Kålåmo pandito vyatto medhåvi digharattam appa- 
rajakkhajåtiko. yam nün&ham Ålårassa Kálémasse patha- 
mam dhammam deseyyam, so imam dhammam khippam eva 
bjånissatiti. 111 atha kho antarehitå devatå bhagavato âro- 
cosi: sattåhakålamkato bbente Ålåro Kál&mo 'ti. bhaga- 
vato pi kho flåpam udapådi sattåhakålamkato Маго Kålåmo 
"ti. atha kho bhagavato etad abosi : mabåjåniyo kho Ålåro 
Kålåmo, sace hi so imam dhammam suneyya, kbippam eva 
Ajáneyy& "ti. 121 atha kho bhagavato etad ahosi: kassa nu 
kho aham pathamam dhammam deseyyam, ko imam dham- 
mam khippam eva åjånissatiti. atha kho bhagavato etad 
ahosi: ayam kho Uddako Råmeputto pandito vyatto 
medhåvt digharattam eppersjekkhejåtiko. yam nånåham 
Uddakassa Råmaputtassa psthamam dhammam deseyyam, so 
imam dhammam khippam eva åjånissatiti. |131 atha kho 
antarshitå devatå bhagavato årocesi: abhidosakülamkato 
bhante Uddako Råmaputto 'ti. bhagavato pi kho йарат 
udapådi abhidosakdlamkato Uddako Råmaputto 'ti. satha 
kho bhagavato etad ahosi; mahåjåniyo kho Uddako Råma- 
putto, sace hi so imam dhammam suneyya, khippam eva 
åjåneyyå "ti. 1411 atha kho bhagavato etad ahosi: kassa nu 
kho aham pathamam dhammam deseyyam, ko imam dham- 


8 MAHÅVAGGA. [1.6. 5-10, 


mam khippam eve ájánissatiti. athe kho bhagavato etad 
ahosi: bahüpakárá kho "те paficavaggiyå bhikkhü, ye 
mam padhånapahitattam upettbehimsu. yam пйпАһаш pafi- 
cavaggiyånam bhikkhünam pathamam dhammam deseyyan 
ti. 151 atha kho bhagavato etad ahosi: kaham nu kho 
etarshi paficavaggiyé bhikkhü viharantiti. addasa kho bha- 
gavå dibbena cakkhuná visuddhena atikkantam&nusakena 
paficavaggiye bhikkhü Báránasiyam viharante Isipatane mi- 
gadáye. atha kho bhagavå Uruveláyam yathábhirantam vi- 
heritvå yena Bár&nasí tena cårikam pakkåmi. |161 addesa 
kho Upako Ajtviko bhagavantam antarå ca Gayam antarå 
ca bodhim addhánamaggapatipennam, disvana bhegavantam 
etad avoca : vippasannåni kho te åvuso indriyAni, parisuddho 
chavivanno pariyodáto. kam ‘si tvam åvuso uddissa pabba- 
jito, ko vå te satthå, kassa vA tvam dhammam roceatti. ||7 || 
evam vutte bhagavå Upakam åjtvikam gåthåhi ajjhabhdsi : 


sabbabhibhd sabbavidd "ham asmi sabbesu dhammesu anu- 
palitto 

sabbafijaho tanbekkhaye vimutto, eayam abhififidya kam 
uddiseyyam.| 

na me ёсагіуо atthi, sadiso me na vijjati, 

eadevakasmim' lokasmim n’ atthi me patipuggalo.| 

aham hi arahá loke, aham satthå anuttaro, 

- еко ’mhi sammásambuddho, sitibhüto 'smi nibbuto.| 
dhammacakkam pavattetum gacchåmi Küsinam puram, 
andhabhåtaami lokasmim &hafihi amatadudrabhin ti. || 8 | 


yatha kho tvam åvuso patijånåsi arah’ asi svantajino "ti : 


mådiså ve jinå honti ye pattå &savakkhayam, 
jité me påpakå dhammå taamåham Upaka jino 'ti. 


evam vutte Upako Ajiviko hupeyya &vuso''ti vatv& slsam 
okampetvå ummaggam gahetvå pakkámi. ||P|| satha kho 
bhagavå anupubbena cárikam caramåno yens Bårånasi 
Taipatanamigadåyo yena paflcavaggiyå bhikkhü ten’ upa- 
samkami. addasamsu kho paflcavaggiyå bhikkhå bhaga- 
vantam dårato 'va Agacchantam, disvàna afifiamafifiam вар- 
thapesum : ayam åvuso samano Gotamo ågaochati båhulliko 


L & 10-15.] МАНАТАССА. А 9 


padbånavibbbanto åvatto båbullåya. во n’ eva abhivåde- 
tabbo na pacouttbåtabbo nåssa pattacivaram patiggaheta- 
bbam, api ca kho åsanam thapetabbam, sace &kankhiseati 
nistdissatiti.|| 101 yetbá-yathá kho bhagavå paficavaggiye 
bhikkhf upasamkamati, tatbå-tathå te paficavaggiy& bhi- 
kkhü sakåye katikáya asapthahantà bhagavantam pacou- 
ggantvå eko bhagavato pattacivaram patiggahesi, eko &sa- 
nam pafiflåpesi, eko padodakam pådapitham p&dakathalikam 
upsnikkhipi  nisidi bbagavå pafifiatte &sane, nisajja kho 
bhagavà раде pakkhálesi. арі "вап bhagavantam nåmens ca 
&vusovådens са samudácarsnti.||ll|| ета vutte bhagavå 
paficavaggiye bhikkhü etad avoca: má bhikkhave tathá- 
gatam пёшера ca Åvusovådena ca samudácarathe. erehem 
bhikkhave tathågato sammásambuddho. ` odahatha bhikkha- 
ve sotam, amatam edhigatam, aham anusåsåmi, aham dham- 
mam desemi. yathdnusittham tathå petipajjamånd na 
cirass' eva yas’ atthåye kulaputtå sammad eva agárasmá 
anagåriyam pabbajanti, tad anuttaram brahmacariyapariyo- 
sånam dittheva dhamme sayam abhiññá sacchikatvA upa- 
sampajja vibarissathé 'ti. 1121 evam vutte paficavaggiyå 
bhikkhO bhagavantam etad avocum : tåya pi kho tvam åvuso 
Gotama cariyåya táya patipaddya tåya dukkerakårikåye n’ 
ev’ njjhagå uttarimanussadhammam alamariyaflánadassana- 
visesam, kim pane tvam etarahi báhulliko padhánavibbhanto 
Avatto bühulláya adhigamissasi uttarimanussadhammam ala- 
mariyafiåpadassanavisesan ti. |131 evam vutte bhagavà 
paficavaggiye bhikkhü etad avoca: na bhikkhave tathágato 
bébulliko, na: padh&navibbhanto, na ávatto båhullåya. ara- 
ham bhikkhave tathågato sammåsambuddho. odahatba bhi- 
kkheve sotam, amatam sdbigatam, aham anusåsåmi, sham 
dhammam desemi. yatbånusittbam tathå petipajjamán& na 
cirass’ ova yass’ atthüya kuleputtá sammad eva agürasmó 
anagåriyam pabbejanti, ted anuttaram brahmacariyaperiyosá- 
nam dittheve dhamme sayam abhififié sacchikatvå upasam- 
pejja viharissathá 'ti. 1141  dutiyem pi kho paficavaggiy& 
bhikkhü bhagavantam etad avocum — på —, dutiyam рї kho 
bhagavå peficavaggiye bhikkhü etad avoca— på —, tatiyam pi 
kho peficavaggiy& bhikkhà bhagavantam etad avocum: {уа 


10 MAHÁVAGGA. [L @ 15-22, 


pi kho tvam åvuso Gotama cariyåya {ув patipadåys . . 
slamariyafiánadassanavisesan ti. 11511 evam vutte bhagavå 
paficavaggiye bhikkhü etad avoca: abhijånåthe me no tumhe 
bhikkhave ito pubbe evarüpam bhåsitam etan ti. no b” 
etam bhante ‘ti. areham bhikkhave tathågato sammåsam- 
buddbo. odshatha . . . viharissathA "ti. asakkhi kho bha- 
gavå paiicavaggiye bhikkhü safifiåpetum. atha kho райса- 
vaggiyå bhikkhü bhagavantam puna sussüsimsu sotam oda- 
himeu afifidcittam upatthåpesum. || 16 || 

atha kho bhagavà paficavaggiye bhikkhO Amantesi: dvo 
"пе bhikkhave antá pabbsjiteng na sevitabbå. katame dve. 
yo cåyam kåmesu kAmasukhallikanuyogo hino gammo po- 
thujjaniko anariyo anatthesamhito, yo cåyam attakilamatbå- 
nuyogo dukkho anariyo anatthasamhito, ete kho bhikkhave 
ubho ante anupagamme majjbimå patipadA tathågatens abhi- 
sambuddhå cakkhukarani fidpakaran! upasamüya abhiññâya 
sambodhåya nibbånåya samvatteti. 117 1 ketamå ca så bi- 
kkbave majjhimá patipadå tathågatene abhisambuddhé ca- 
kkhukerant fidnakarani upasamáya abhiññâya eambodhåye 
nibbånåya samvattati. ayam eva ariyo atthangiko тарро, 
seyyath’ idam: sammáditthi sammüsamkappo sammáv&cá 
sammákemmanto sammååjivo sammåvåyåmo sammåsati sam- 
måsamådbi. ayam kho så bhikkhave majjhim& patipadå ta- 
thügatena abhisambuddhá cakkhukarani fiàpakarapt upasa- 
máya abhiññáya sambodháya nibbånåya samvattati. |1181 
idam kho pana bhikkhave dukkham ariyasaccam, jåti pi 
dukkhé, jaråpi dukkhå, vyådbi pi dukkhé, maraņam pi dukk- 
ham, appiyehi sampayogo dukkho, piyehi vippayogo dukkho, 
yam p’ iccham na labhati tam pi dukkham, samkhittena 
рейс’ upádánakkhandhápi dukkbå. 119 || idam kho pana bhi- 
kkheve dukkhasamudayam ariyasaccam, yáyam tanhå po- 
nobbbavikå nandirfgasahagata tatratatrübhinandini, seyyath’ 
{dam : kåmatanhå bhavatanhá vibhavatanhé. |201 idam kho 
pana bhikkhave dukkhenirodbam ariyasaccam, yo tasså 
yeva tanbåye asesaviråganirodho cågo patinissaggo mutti anå- 
layo. 12111 idam kho pana bhikkhave dukkhanirodhegå- 
mini patipadá eriyasaocam, ayam eva ariyo atthangiko 
maggo, seyyath’ idam: sammåditthi . . . sammåsamådhi. [| 22 |j 


1.6, 23-30.) MAHÅVAGGA. : 11 


idam dukkham ariyasaccan ti me bhikkhave pubbe апа- 
nossotesa dhammesu cakkhum udapådi, fidnam udepådi, pañ- 
йа udapådi, vijjà udspådi, àloko udapådi. tam kho pan’ 
idam dukkham eriyasaccam рагіййеууап ti me bhikkhave 
— la— parififidtan ti me bhikkhave pubbe ananussutesu 
dhammesu cakkhum udapádi, flånam udapådi, раййА udapådi, 
vijjà udap&di, åloko udapådi. 2311 idam dukkhasamudayam 
агіуалассап ti me bhikkhave . . , åloko udapádi. tam kho 
pan’ idam dukkhasamudayam ariyasaccam pahátabban ti me 
bhikkhave — la — pahinan ti me bhikkhave . . . &loko uda- 
иде 12411 idam dukkhanirodham ariyasaccan ti me bhikkha- 
. ñloko udapådi. tam kho pan’ idam dukkhanirodham 
МО тес saochikåtabban ti me bhikkhave— la — sacchika- 
tan ti me bhikkhave . . . Моко udapádi, 1251 idam dukkha- 
nirodhagümini patipadà ariyesaccan ti me bhikkhave . . 
Моко udapádi. tam kho pan’ idam dukkhanirodhagáminit 
petipadá ariyasacoam bhåvetabban ti me bhikkhave — lå — 
bhåvitan ti me bhikkhave . . . åloko udapádi.||26||  yàve 
Кітай ca me bhikkhave imesu catusu ariyasaccesu evam 
tiparivattam dvådasåkåram yathábhütam flAnadassanam па 
suvisuddham ahosi, n’ eva tåvåham bhikkhave sadevake loke 
samárake sabrahmake eassamapsbráhmapiyà рајёув sadeva- 
manussàya anuttaram sammásambodhim abhieambuddho ’ti 
paccañūásim. ||27|| yato ca kho me bhikkhave imesu catusu 
ariyasaccesu evam tiparivattam dvådesåkåram yathübhütam 
fidpadassanam suvisuddham ahosi, atbåbam bhikkhave sa- 
devake loko samårake sabrahmake sassamanabråhmaniyå pa- 
јёув sadevamanussåye anuttaram sammásambodhim abhisam- 
buddho 'ti paccafifiásim. 112811 ñánañ ca pana me dassanam 
udapådi : akuppå me cetovimutti, ayam antimå jati, n' attbi 
dani punabbhavo ’ti. idam avoca bbagavå, attamanå pafica- 
vaggiyå bhikkbå bhagavato bhåsitam ebhinandanti ima- 
emifi ca pana veyyükerapasmim bhafifiamine Ayasmato 
Kondaññassa virsjam vitamalam dhammacakkhum uda- 
padi yam kifici samudayadhammam sabbam tam nirodha- 
dhamman ti. ([29 || 
pavattite ca bhagavaté dhammacakke bhummå devà ва- 
ddam anussåvesum : evam bhagavaté Bárünasiyam Isipatane 


19 MAHÄVAGGA. ` 1.4. 80 21. 


migadåye anuttaram dhammacakkam pavettitam appativat- 
Чуаш samanena vå bråhmanens và devena vå Márena vå 
Brahmuné vå kenaci vå lokasmin Н. bhamménam devånam 
saddam sutvå Cåtumabåråjikå дета saddam anussiveaum 
—la— Cátumahárájikánam devanam saddam sutvå Tåvatimså 
devá—la— Yam devå—ls— Tusitå dova—la—NimmAnarati 
devå — la — Paranimmitavasavatti devå — la — Brahmakáyi- 
КА devå saddam anussåvesum : evam bhagavatå Bárüpasiyam 
Ieipatane migadåye anuttaram dhammacakkam pavattitam 
appativattiyam samapena vá bråbmanena vå devena vá 
Márena vA Brahmuná vå Кепасї vå lokasmin ti.||30]|| iti ha 
tena khanena tena layena tena muhuttena yåva Brahmelokå 
saddo abbhuggacchi, ayefi ca kho dasasshassilokadbátu sam- 
kampi sampakampi sampavedhi, eppamáno са ulåro obhåso 
loko påturabosi stikkamma devånam devánubhávam. atha 
kho bhagavå imam udånam udánesi: aññási vata bho Kon- 
dafifio afifiåsi vata bho Kondañño ”ti. iti h’ idam &yasmato 
Kondafifiassa А fl å te kondafifio tv eva nàmam ahosi. || 31 |l 
atha kho &yasmá Afifiåtakondafifio ditthadhammo patta- 
dhammo viditadhemmo pariyogá]hadhammo tinnavicikiocho 
vigatakathamkatho vee&rajjeppatto aparappaccayo satthu så- 
sane bhagavantam etad avoca: labheyy&ham bhante bhaga- 
vato santike pabbajjam, labbeyyam upasampadan ti. ehi 
bhikkhü 'ti bhagavå avoca, svåkkhåto dhammo, cara brahma- 
eariyam eammå dukkbasss entakiriyåyå "ti. så 'va tassa 
åyasmato upasampadá ahosi. ||32 || 

atha kho bhagavå tadavasese bhikkbü dhammiyå ketháya 
ovadi anusisi. atha kho åyasmato ca Vappassa &yasmato 
ca Bhaddiyassa bhagavatå dhammiyå katháya ovadiye- 
månånam anusásipamünánam virajam vitamelam dhamma- 
cakkhum udapådi yam kifici samudayadhammam sabbam 
tam nirodhadhamman ti. |33|| te dittbadbammå patta- 
dhammá viditadhamm& periyogá]hadhammá tipnavicikicchà 
vigataksthamkatbå vesárajjappattà aparsppaoosyå satthu så- 
sane bhagavantam etad avocum : labheyy&ma mayam bhante 
bhagavato santike pabbajjam, labheyy4ma upasampadan ti. 
etha bhikkhavo "ti bhagavå avoca, svåkkhåto dhammeo, cara- 


I. 6. 24-41.] MAHÅVAGGA. 13 


tha brahmacariyam sammå dukkhassa antakiriyåyå ”ti. så 
"va tesam Éyasmantánam upasampadá ahosi. ||34 i| 

athe kho bhagavé tadavasese bhikkhü nihårabhatto imin& 
uihdrena dhammiyå katháya ovadi anusási: yam tayo bhik- 
khå pindáya caritvà åharanti, tena chabbaggo yápeti. 351 

atha kho åyasmato ca Mahünümassa áyasmeto ca 
Assnjissa bhagavaté dhammiyå kath&ya ovadiyamånånam 
anusåsiyamånånam virajam vitamalam dhammacakkhum 
udapådi yam Кійсі samudayadhammam sabbam tam ni- 
rodhadhamman ti. 13611 te ditthadhsmmá pattadhammá 
viditadhammå pariyogå]bedhammå tinnsvicikicecbå vigata- 
kathamkathå vesårsjjappattå aparappaocayå satthn såsane 
bhagavantam etad avocum : labheyyåma mayam bhante bha- 
gavato santike pabbejjam, lsbheyyáma upasampadan ti. etha 
bhikkhavo ’ti bhagavå avoca, svåkkhåto dhammo, caratha 
brahmacariyam sammå dukkhassa antakiriyåyå "і. så ’va 
tesam fyasmantdnam upasampada abosi. || 37 | 

athe kho bhagavå paficavaggiye bbikkhü Amantesi: rù- 
pem bhikkhave anattå, rüpeil ca h’ idam bhikkhave ана 
abhavissa, na yidam rüpam åbådhåya samvatteyya, labbhetha 
ca rüpe evam me rüpam hotu, evam me rüpam må shositi. 
yasmå ca kho bhikkhave rüpam anattå, tasmå rüpam åbådhå- 
ye samvattati, na ca labbhati ripe evam me rüpam hotu, 
evam me råpam må ahositi. |38|| vedanå anattá, vedanå ca 
h'idam bhikkhave attå abhavissa, na yidam vedanå Abådbåya 
samvatteyya, labbhetha ca vedanåya evam me vedanå hotu, 
evam me vedanå må ahositi. yasmå ca kho bhikkhave 
vedanå anattá, tasmå vedan& åbådhåys samvattati, na са 
labbhati vedanüya evam me vedanå hotu, evam me vedanå 
må ahositi. |1391 saññå ansttå — la —ssmihårå anattá, 
samkhárá ca h’ idam bhikkhave attå abbavissamsu, na yidam 
samkhårå ÅAbådbåys samvatteyyum, labbhetha ca samkhå- 
resu evam me samkhårå hontu, evam me samkhårå må 
ahesun ti. yasmå ca kho bhikkhave samkhárà anattå, 
tasmå samkbårå ábAdháya samvattanti, na ca labbbati sam- 
kháresu evam me samkbárá hontu, evam me samkhårå må 
shesun ti. |1401 vifitiánam anatta, viññánañ ca h’ idam bhi- 
kkhave attå abhavissa, na yidam viññánam &bádhüya sam- 


14 MAHÁVAGGA. [I. @ 41-47. 


vatteyya, labbheths ca viññáne evam me vififiånam hotu, 
evam me vififidpam må ahositi, yasmå ca kho bhikkhave 
vififiåpam apattá, tasmå viññánam &bádháya samvattati, na 
ca labbbati vififlåpe evam me vififidpam hotu, evap me 
vififiåpnam må ahositi. ||41|| tam kim mafifiatha bhikkhave, 
råpam niccam vå aniccam vå 'ti. aniccam bhante. yam 
panåniccam, dukkham vi tam sukham vå 'ti dukkham 
bhante. yam penániocam dukkham viparipåmedhammam, 
kallam nu tam eamanupassitum etam mama, eso ‘ham asmi, 
eso me atta 'ti. no h’ etam bhante. ||42|| vedan& — la — 
ваййй — la — samkhårå — la — viññåņam nicoam và aniccam 
v&'ti. aniccam bhante. yam panåniocam, dukkham vå tam 
sukham vå ’ti. dukkham bhante. yam panániccam duk- 
kham viperipnémadhammam, kallam nu tam eamanupassitum 
etam mama, eso "ham asmi, eso me attá 'ti, no h’ etam 
bhante. |43|| tasmát iha bhikkhave yam kifici rüpam atitå- 
nágatapeccuppannam sjjhattam va behiddhå và o]árikam vå 
sukhumam vå hinam vå panitam vá yam dåre vå santike vA, 
sabbam rüpam n’ etam mama, n’ eso Баш asmi, na me во 
attå 'ti evam etam yathübhütam sammeppafifidya dattha- 
bbam.|[44|| yå kaci vedanå — la — yñ kåci ваййА — la —ye 
keci samkbårå — la — yam kifici тіййёрет atit&u&gatepaccu- 
ppannam ajjhattem vå behiddha va olårikam vá sukhumam 
và hinam và panitam vá yam düre vå santike và esbbam 
vififlånam n’ etam mama, n' eso ’ham asmi, na me во atté ’ti 
evam etam yatbåbbåtam sammappafifiàya datthabbam. ||465 || 
evam passam bhikkhave sutavå ariyasåvako rüpasmim pi 
nibbindati, vedanåya pi nibbindati, safifidya pi nibbindati, 
samkbáreeu pi nibbindati, vifiiåpssmim pi nibbindati, nib- 
bindam virajjati, virågå vimuccati, vimuttasmim vimutt' 
amhiti flåpam hoti, khinå játi, vusitam brahmecariyam, ka- 
tam karaniyam, néperem itthattåyå ”ti pejanatiti. |46 idam 
avoca bhagavå, attamanå paficavaggiyå bhikkhü bhagavato 
bhásitam abhinandanti. imesmifi ca pana veyy&karapsemim 
bhaüiamáne palicavaggiyánam bbikkbfinem anup&dáya ása- 
vehi cittáni vimuccimsu. tena kho pana samayena cha loke 
arahanto honti. ||47 |1611 
pathamabhånevåram. 


VINAYAPITAKAM. 


MAHAVAGGA. 


Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammásambuddhasea. 


I. 


Tena samayena buddho bhagavå Uruvelåyam viharati 
najjà Nerafljaråya tire bodhirukkhamüle pathamåbhisem- 
buddho. atha kho bhagavá bodbirukkhamåle sattåham eka- 
pellaükena nisidi vimuttieukhapatisamvedi. |11 atha kho 
bhagavå rattiyà pathamam yåmam  peticcasamuppádam 
anulomapatilomam manas’ &kási: avijjåpsocayå samkhárá, 
samkhérapaccayá vifüünam, viüfiánspacoayà nümarüpam, 
n&ámarüpapaccayá “salàyatanam, ва]йуа{апарассауй phasso, 
phassapaccayå vedanå, vedanápaccayá tanhå, tanhüpaccayü 
upådånem, upådånepsccayå bhavo, bhavapaccayå jåti, jåti- 
paceayé jaråmaranam sokaparidevadukkhaedomanassupåyåså 
sambhaventi. evam etassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa 
samudayo hoti. avijjåya tv eva asesaviråganirodbå samkbå- 
ranirodho, samkháranirodhá vififiånanirodho, vififlånanirodhå 
n&marüpanirodho, námarüpanirodhá sa]&yatananirodho, sa]á- 
yatananirodhå phassanirodho, phassanirodhà vedanånirodho, 
vedanånirodbå tanhånirodho, taphánirodhà upådånanirodho, 
upådånanirodbå bhavanirodho, bhavanirodhå jåtinirodho, jati- 
nirodhå jardmaranam sokaperidevadukkhadomenassupåyåså 
nirujjhanti. evam etassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhasss 


VOL, ш. 1 


9 MAHÁVAGGA. [I. 1. 2-9. 2. 


nirodho hotiti. 12] atha kho bhagavå etam attham viditvà 
tåyam velåyam imam udánam udánesi : 


yadå have påtubhavanti dhammå åtåpino jhåyato brüh- 


manassa 

ath’ assa kenkhá vapayanti sabbå yato pajánáti sshetu- 

dhamman ti. |1341 

athe kho bhagavé rattiyå majjhimem yåmam paticca- 
samuppådam anulomapatilomam manas’ åkåsi: втіјјёрассауё 
samkhárá, samkhårspacoayå viflfiånam, vififiånapaccayå nå- 
marüpam —la— evam etassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhasss 
eamudayo hoti — pa — nirodho hotiti. |141 atha kho bhagava 
etam attham viditvå tåyam velåyam imam udånam udánesi : 


yadå have pátubhavanti dhammé åtåpino jhåyato brah- 
manassa 

ath’ азва kankhá vapayanti sabbå yato khayam рассауй- 
nam avedtti. ||5| 


atha kho bhegavå rattiyå pacchimam yümem paticca- 
samuppådam anulomapatilomam manas’ åkåsi : avijjåpeccayh 
samkbårå, samkhårepaccayå vififidgam — gha — evam etassa 
kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samadayo hoti — på — nirodho 
hotiti. |61 atha kho bhagavå etam attham viditvå tåyam 
velåyam imam udånam udånesi : 


yadå have pátubhavanti dhammå åtåpino jbåyato bråh- 
manassa f 
vidhûpayam titthati Márasenam suriyo ’va obhåssyam 
antalikkhan ti. ||7 || 
bodhikethå nittbitå. [IN 


atha kho bhagavå sattåbasss aocayena tamhá samådhimhå 
vutthahitvå bodbirukkhamala yena Ajepålanigrodho ten’ 
upasamkemi, upasamkemitvå Ajepålanigrodbarukkhamåle 
sattåham ekspallankene nisidi vimuttisukhapatisamvedi. |11] 
atha kho aññataro huhunkaja&tiko bráhmano yena bha- 
gavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkemitvà bhagavatå saddhim 
eammodi, sammodeniyam katham såraniyam vitisåretvå ekam- 
antam atthåsi, ekamantam tbito kho so bråhmano bhaga- 


I. 1. 1-0.] MAHÅVAGGA. 15 


tens kho pana samayena Bårånasiyam Y aso паша kula- 
putto setthiputto sukhumélo hoti, tassa tayo påsådå honti, 
eko hemantiko, еко gimhiko, еко vassiko. во vassike påsåde 
cattáro mdse nippurisehi turiyehi paricåriyamåno na hettbå 
påsådå orohati. atha kho Yasassa kulaputtassa paficahi kå- 
meguyehi samappitassa samangibhütassa paricåriyamånassa 
patigace ‘eva niddå okkami, perijanassápi paccbá nidd& okka- 
mi, sabbarattiyo ca telappedipo jbåyati [14 atha kho Yaso 
kulaputto patigaco’eva patibujjhitvå addasa sakam parijanam 
supantam, afiflisad kacche viņam, afiflisså kanthe mutingam, 
efiílissà kacche &lamberam, afifiam vikesikam, afifiam vikkhe- 
likam, vippalapantiyo, hatthappattam eus&nam шаййе. dis- 
van’ ваа fdinavo páturahosi, nibbidåye cittam santhüsi. 
atha kho Yaso kulaputto udánam udånesi: upaddutam vata 
bho, upassattham vata bho 'ti. |2]| atha kho Yaso kulaputto 
suvannapådukåyo Årohitvå yena nivesanadvåram ten’ upa- 
samkami, amanuseá dvåram vivarimsu må Yasassa kula- 
puttasea koci antaråyam akAsi agårasmå anagåriyam pabba- 
jjáyà 'ti. atha kho Yaso kulaputto yena nagaredvåram ten’ 
upasamkami, amsnusså dvåram vivarimsu må Yasasss kula- 
puttassa koci antaryam akåsi agårasmå anagáriyam pabba- 
jjáy& 'ti. atha kho Yaso kulaputto yena Isipatanam mi- 
gadåyo ten’ upasamkami. 131 tena kho pana samayena 
bhagava rattiyå pacoüsasamayam pecoutthåya ajjhokdse 
cañkamati. sddasa kho bhagavå Yasam kulaputtam dürato 
"та dgacchantam, dievåna oafikamå orohitvà pafifiatte &sane 
nisidi. atha kho Yaso kulaputto bhagavato avidüre udånam 
udånesi : upaddutam vata bho, upassattham vata bho "ti. 
atha kho bhegavå Yasam kulaputtam etad avoca: idam kho 
Yasa anupaddutam, idam anupessattham. ehi Yasa nisída, 
dhammam te desessámiti. |141 atha kho Yaso kulaputto 
idam kira anupaddutam, idam anupassatthan ti hattho uda- 
£go suvannapådukåbi orohitvå yena bhagavå ten’ upasamka- 
mi, upasamkamitvü bhagavantam abhivådetvå ekamantam 
nisidi. ekamantam nisinnassa kho Yasassa kulaputtassa bba- 
gavå anupubbiketham kathesi seyyath' idam: dånaketham 
eilakatham saggakatham kåmåner ådinsvam okåram samki- 
leaam nekkhamme ånisamsam pakåsesi. |5|| yadå bhagavà 


16 MAHÅVAGGA. П. 7. 6-10. 


&üüási Yasam kulaputtam kallecittam muduoittam vintva- 
ranacittam udaggacittam pasannacittam, atha ya buddhánam 
såmukkamsikå dhammadesané tam pakAsesi, dukkham samu- 
dayam nirodham maggam. seyyathåpi n&ma suddham va 
ttham apagatakAjakam sammad eva rajanam patiganheyya, 
evam eva Yasassa kulaputtassa tasmim yeva åsane virajam 
vitamalam dhammacakkhum udapådi yam kifici samudaya- 
dhammam sabbam tam nirodhadhamman ti. 161 atha kho 
Yasassa kulaputtassa måtå påsådam abhirühitvà Yasam kula- 
pattam apassanti yena setthi gabapati ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå setthim gahapatim etad avoca: putto te ga- 
hapati Yaso na dissatiti. atha kho setthi gahapati catuddis& 
assadåte uyyojetvå såmam yeva yena Isipatanam migadåyo 
ten” upasamkami. addass kho settbi gahapati suvannapå- 
dukånam nikkhepam, disvåne tam yeva anugamåsi. ||71 
addass kho bhagavå setthim gahapatim dürato ”va ágaochan- 
tam, disvána bhagavato etad ahosi: yam nåoåham tathå- 
rüpam iddh&bhisamkháram abhisamkh&reyyam, yathé setthi 
gahapati idha nisinno idha nisinnem Yasam kulaputtam na 
passeyyå 'ti atha kho bhagavå tathárüpam iddbhåbhisam- 
khåram abhisamkbáresi. |81 atha kho setthi gahapati yena 
bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam etad 
evoca : api bhante bhagavé Yasam kulaputtam passeyyå "ti. 
tena bi gahapati nisida. app eva náms idha nisinno idha 
nisinnam Yasam kulaputtam passeyyåsiti. atha kho settbi 
gahepati idh’ eva kiráham nisinno idha nisinnam Yasam 
kulaputtam passissåmiti hattho udeggo bhagavantam abhivå- 
detvå ekamantam nisidL |9] ekamantam nisinnassa kho 
setthissa gahapatissa bhagavé anupubbikatham kathesi —la — 
&parappaccayo eatthu sásane bhagavantam etad avoca: 
abhikkantam bbante, abbikkantam bhante, seyyathåpi bhante 
nikkujjitam và ukkujjeyys, paticchannam vA vivareyya, mů- 
lhassa và maggam ácikkheyya, andhakáre và telapsjjotam 
dhåreyya cakkhumanto råpåni dakkhintiti, evam eva bhaga- 
vata anekapariy&yens dhammo pakåsito. ев’ Aham bhante 
bhagavantam sarapam gacchámi dhammaíl ca bhikkhusam- 
ghafi cs, upåsakem mam bhagavå dhåretu ajjatagge panupe- 
tam sarepem gaten ti. so ’va loke pathamam upåssko ahosi 


I. 7, 10-15.] MAHÅVAGGA. 17 


tevkoiko. |101 atha kho Yasassa kulaputtasss pituno dham- 
me desiyamåne ysthådittham yathAviditam bhümim pacca- 
vekkhantassa anupådåya Asavehi cittam vimucoi. atha kho 
bhagavato etad ahosi: Yasassa kulaputtassa pituno dhamme 
demiyamáne yathådittham yethåviditam bhümim paccave- 
kkhantasss aaupådåye dsavehi cittam vimuttam. abhabbo 
kho Yaso kulaputto hfnåyåvattitvå kame peribhufljitum sey- 
yathåpi pubbe agárikebhüto. yam nindham tam iddhå- 
bhisamkháram patippassambheyyan ti. atha kho bhagavå 
tam iddhåbbisamkhåram patippessambhesi. ||11 1 addasa 
kho setthi gabapati Yasam kulaputtam nisinpam, disvåna 
Yasam kulaputtam etad avoca: måtå te tata Yasa parideva- 
sokasampannå, dehi mátu jivitan ti. |12|| atha kho Yaso 
kulaputto bhagavantam ullokesi. atha kho bhagavå setthim 
gahapatim etad avoca: tam kim maññasi gahapati, Yasassa 
sekhena flånena sekhena dassanena dhammo dittho seyyatbapi 
tayà. tassa yatháditthem yatháviditam bhümim paccave- 
kkhantassa anupádáya Åsavehi cittam vimuttam. bbabbo nu 
kho Yaso gabapati hinåyåvattitvå kane paribhufijitum seyya- 
thåpi pubbe sgårikabhåto 'ti. no h'etam bhante, Yasassa 
kho gahapati kulaputtassa sekhena fidnena sekhena dassanena 
dhammo dittho seyyathapi tay&. tassa yathddittham yath&- 
viditam bhümim paccavekkhantassa anupádáya åsavehi oit- 
tam vimuttam. abhabbo kho gahapati Yaso kulaputto hin&- 
yåvattitvå káme paribhufijitum seyyathápi pubbe agárika- 
bhüto 'ti. 11311 låbhå bhante Yasassa kulaputtasse, eulad- 
dham bhante Yasassa kulsputtasse, yathd Yasassa kulaput- 
tassa anupádáya &savehi cittam vimuttam. sadhivåsetu me 
bhante bhagsvå ajjatanâya bhattam Yasena kulsputtena 
pacchásamanené ”ti. adhivüsesi bhagavé tunbibbåvens. atha 
kho setthi gahapati bhagavato adhivisanam viditvå utthá- 
yåsanå bhegavantam abhivådetvå padakkhipam katvå pakkå- 
mi. |l4| atha kho Yaso kulaputto acirappakkante setthi- 
mbi gahapatimhi bhagaventam stad avoca: labhoyyüham 
bhante bhagavato santike pabbajjam, labbeyyam upasampa- 
dan ti. ehi bhikkhü "і bhagavå avoca, svåkkhåto dhammo, 
cara brehmacariyam sammå dukkhasss antakiriyåyå ‘ti. så 


хот. ш. 2 


18 MAHÄVAGGA. (1. 7. 15-9. 1. 


‘va tassa Ayasmato upasampadå ahosi. tena kho pana sama- 
yena satta loko arahanto honti [|15] 
Yasapabbajjå nitthitå. 71 


atha kho bhagavå pubbanhasamayam nivåsetvå pattaciva- 
ram àdáya åyasmetå Yasena pacohásamapena yena setthissa 
gahapatiess nivesanam ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå 
paiifiatte åsane nisidi. satha kho åyasmato Yasassa måtå ca 
purånsdutiyikå ca yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkemimsu, upa- 
samkamitvå bhagavantam abhivüdetvà ekemantam nisidim- 
au. |l|| t&sam bhagavå anupubbiketbam kathesi seyyath’ 
“dam: dånakatham silakatham saggaketham kåmånam ádi- 
navam okåram samkilesam nekkhamme Anisamsam pakásesi. 
yada tà bhagavá efifiåsi kallacittå muducittå vinivaranacitté 
uddaggacittå pasannacittå, atha уё buddhånam sámukkamsi- 
kå dhammadesanå tam pakásesi, dukkham samudayam ni- 
rodham maggam. seyyatbåpi nåma suddham vattham apa- 
gatakAjakam sammad eva rajanem patiganheyya, evam eva 
tåsam tasmim yeva Åsane virejam vitamalam dhammaca- 
‚ kkhum udapådi yam kifici samudayadhammam eabbam tam 
nirodhadhamman ti. |2|| tå ditthedbammå pattadhammá 
viditadhammå pariyog&|hadhammá tinnavicikicchå vigataka- 
thamkathå vesårajjappattå aparappaccayá satthu såsane bha- 
gavantam etad avocum: sbbikkantam bhante, abhikkantam 
bhente — la — età mayam bhante bhagavantam saranam ga- 
cchåma dhammañ ca bhikkhusamghail ca, upåsikåyo no bha- 
gavå dháretu ajjatagge pånupetå earanam gatå ”ti. tå "va 
loke pathamam upåsikå ahesum tevåcikå. [3|  atha kho 
Ayasmeto Yasases måtå ca pitå ca purånedutiyikå ca bhaga- 
vantañ ca Ayasmantafi са Yasam panitena khådaniyens bho- 
janiyena sabatthå santappetvå sampavåretvå bhagevantam 
bhuttåvim onitapattapinim ekemantam nisidimsu. atha kho 
bhagavå &yasmato Yasasss måtarafl ca ріќагай ca puråna- 
dutiyikafi ca dhammiy& ketbåye sandassetvà samådapetvå 
samuttejetvå sampahamsetvå utthåyåasnå pakkAmi. ||4 1811 


&ssosum kho åyasmato Yasassa cattåro gihisshåyaké 
Bårånasiyam setthånusettbinam kulånam puttå Vimala 


1.014] MAHÅVAGGA. 19 


Bubáhu Punnsji Gavampeti: Yaso kira kuleputto 
kesamassum ohåretvå kåsåyåni vatthüni acchådetvå sgå- 
raamå ansgåriyam pabbajito ‘ti. sutvana nesam etad 
&hos:' ‘na bi nüna so orako dhammavinayo, na så orakå 
pabbajjå, yattha Yaso kulaputto kesamassum ohåretvå kå- 
øåyåni vatth&ni aoccbådetvå agårasmå anegåriyam pabba- 
jito "й. |1|| te cattàro janå yen&yasmá Yaso ten’ upa- 
samkamimso, upssamkemitvå dyasmantam Yasam abhi- 
vådetvå ekamantam attbamsu. atha kho &yasmá Yaso te 
cattàro gihisahhyake ådåya yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi, 
ekameantam nisinno kho &åyasmå Yaso bhagavantam etad 
avoca: ime me bhante cattåro gihisahåyakå Bardnasiyam 
settbånusettbinam kulånam puttå Vimalo Subéhu Punnaji 
Gavampati, ime cattåro bbagavå ovadatu anueåsat0 "ti. (|2 || 
tesam bhagavå anupubbiketham kathesi seyyath’ ¿dam : då- 
pakatham silskatham saggakatham kåmåuam &dinavam okå- 
ram samkilesam nekkhamme ånisamsam pakAsesi. yada te 
bhagavå afiflåsi kallacitte muducitte vintvaranacitte udagga- 
citte pasannacitte, atha yà buddbånam simukkamsikA dham- 
madesaná tam pakåsesi, dukkham samudeyam nirodham mag- 
gam. eeyyathdpi name suddbam vattham apagatakilakam 
sammad eva rajanam patiganheyya, evam eva tesam tasmim 
yeva åsane virajam vitamalam dhammacakkhum udapádi 
yam kifici samudayadhammam sabbam tam nirodhadham- 
man ti. |8 te ditthadhammá pattadhammé viditadhammå 
pariyogålhadhammå tinnevicikicohå vigatakathamkathå veså- 
rejjeppattà aparappaccayé satthu såsane bhagavantam etad 
avocum: labhoyyüáma mayam bhante bhagavato santike pab- 
bajjam, labbeyyåma upesampadan ti. etha bhikkhavo 'ti 
bhagavå avoca, svåkkhåto dhammo, caratha brahmacariyam 
eammé dukkhassa antakiriyåyå 'ti. ef ’va tesam Вувашап- 
tánam upasampadà abosi. atha kho bhagavå te bbikkü 
dhammiyå katháya ovadi enusási. tesam bhagavaté dham- 
miyå kathéya ovadiyamånånem anusåsiyamånånam anupa- 
dåya Asavehi oittåni vimuccimeu. tena kho pena samayena 
ek&daas loke arahanto honti. |1411 
Oatugihipabbajjå nitthit&. 1911 


20 MAHÅVAGGA. [1. 10-11. 1. 


assosum kho Åyasmato Yasassa pafifiåsamattå gihisahdyaks 
janapadå pubbånupubbekånam kulánam puttå: Yaso kira 
kulaputto kesamassum ohåretvå kåsåyåni vattháni aochådetvå 
agårasmå enegåriyam pabbajito ‘ti. sutvåns nesam etad 
ahosi: na hi nüna so orako dhammavinayo, na så orakå 
pabbajjå, ув а Yaso kuluputto kesamassum ohåretvå kåså- 
yåni vatthåni acohådetvå agårasmå anagåriyam pabbejito 
"ti. |1|| te yenåyasmå Yaso ten’ upasamkamimsu, upesam- 
kamitvå åyasmantam Yasam abbivådetvå ekamantam attham- 
eu. atha kho &yasmá Yaso te pafifiåsamatte gihisaháyake 
Adaya yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkatnitvà bha- 
gavantam abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi. ekamantam ni- 
sinno kho åyasmå Yaso bhagavantam etad avoca: ime me 
bhante райййлашвИ& gihisahdyaké janapadé pubbánupubba- 
kånam kuldnam puttå, ime bbagavå ovadatu anusásatü ”ti. 
121 team bbagavå anupubbikatham kathesi seyyath' idam : 
dånakstham silakatham saggakatham k&mánam &dinavam 
okåram samkilesam nekkhemme 4nisamsam pakåsesi—pa— 
dukkbam ssmudayam nirodham maggam. seyyathåpi nàma 
euddham vattham apagatakåjakem sammad eva rajanam pe- 
tiganheyys, evam eva team tasmim yeva Åsane virajam 
vitamelam dhammacakkhum udapådi yam kiñci eamudaya- 
dhammam sabbam tam nirodhadhamman ti. ||311 te dittha- 
dhammé pattadhemmá viditadhemmá pariyogá]hadhammá 
tinpavicikicchá vigatakathamkathå vesårajjappattå aparappa- 
ocayå satthu såsane bhagavantam etad avocum : labbeyyåma 
mayam bbante bhagavato santike pabbajjam, labheyyåme 
upasampedan ti. etha bhikkhavo 'ti bhagavå avoca, svåk- 
khåto dhammo, caratha brahmecariyam' sammå dukkhassa 
antakiriyåyå 'ti. вй "va tesam åyesmantånam upesampad& 
ahosi. atha kho bbagavå te bhikkhà dhammiyé kathåya ova- 
di anusåsi, tesam bbegavetå dhammiyå kathdya ovadiya- 
månånam anusåsiyamånånam enupádáya dsavehi cittåni vi- 
muccimsu. tena kho pans samsyena ekasattbi loke arahanto 
honti. 14/10 |! 


athe kho bhagavé bhikkhü &mantesi: mutt’ &ham bbik- 
khave sabbepásehi ye dibbå ye са mánus& tumhe pi bhik- 


I. 11. 1-18. 2.) MAHAVAGGA, 21 


khave muttå sabbepåsehi ye dibbå ye ca månuså. caratha 
bhikkhave cårikam bahujanahitåya bahajanasukháya lokánn- 
kampåya atthdya hitdya sukháya devamsnussånam. må 
ekena dve agamittha. desetha bhikkhave dhammam ådika- 
lyånam majjhekalyinam  pariyosánakalyánam såtthem sa- 
vyafljenam kevalaparipunpam perisuddhem brahmacariyam 
pakAscths. santi satt apparajakkhajatika assavanatà dham- 
massa pariháyanti, bhevisssnti dhammasaa efiffåtåro. aham 
pi bhikkhave yena Uruvelå yena Senånigamo ten’ upa- 
і dhammadesanâyâ 'ti. |11 atha kho Маго 

påpimå yena bhagavá ten” upasarpkami, upasamkamitvå bha- 
gavantam gátháya ajjhabhási : 

baddho 'si sabbapásehi уе dibbå ye ca månuså, 

mahåbandhanabaddho 'si, па me samans mokkhasiti.| 

mutt’ Aham sabbapåsehi ye dibbå ye ca mánusá, 

mahábendhanamutto "mhi, nihato tvam asi Antak& ^i. I 

antalikkhacaro piso yv Ayam carati månaso .: ' ^ 

tena tam bådhayissåmi, па me вашара mokkhaatti.| 

råpå saddå gandhå raså photthabbé са manoramå 

ettha me vigato chando, nihato (теш asi Antaká "ti. 


atha kho Маго påpimå jånåti mam bhagavå, јапан mam au- 
gato "ti dukkhi dummeno tatth’ ет’ entaradháyiti |2 | 
Mårakathå nitthità. 111111 


tena kho pana samayena bhikkha nånådiså nånåjanapadå 
pabbejjåpekkhe ca upasampadápekkhe ca ånenti bhagavå ne 
pabbájessati upasampádessatiti, tattha bhikkhü o’ eva kila- 
manti pabbejjåpekkbå ca upesampadåpekkhå ca. atha kho 
bhagavato rahogatassa petisallinassa evam cetaso parivitak- 
ko udapádi: etarahi kho bhikkhà nånådiså nånåjanapadå 
pabbejjåpekkhe ca upasampadápekkhe ca ånenti bhagavå ne 
pebbájessati upasampådessatiti, tattha bhikkhü о’ eva kila- 
manti pabbejjápekkh& ca upasampadåpekkhå са. yam nün&- 
ham bhikkhünam sanujåneyyam tumheva dani bhikkhave 
tåsu-tåsu disisn tesu-tesu janapadesu pabbåjethe upasam- 
pádeth& ’ti. |11 stha kho bhagevå sAyanhassmayam pati- 
sallånå vutthito etasmim nidåne —pa— dhammikatham katv& 


99 MAHÅVAGGA. (I. 19. 3-13. 2, 


bhikkhü Amantesi: idha mayham bhikkhave rahogatassa 
petisallinassa evam cetaso parivitakko udapådi: etarahi kho 
bhikkhü nånådiså nånåjanapedå pabbajjåpekkhe ca upa- 
eampaddpekkhe ca ånenti bhagavå ne pabbåjessati upesampa- 
deseatiti, tattha bhikkhü o’ eva kilamanti pabbajjápekkhá ca 
upasampadåpekkhå ca. yam nün&ham bhikkhünam enujá- 
neyyam tumheva dåni bhikkhave tåsu-tåsu disÁsu tesu-tesu 
janspedesu pabbåjetha upasampådethå ’ti. |21 enujånåmi 
bhikkhave tumhevs dani tåsu-tåsu disåsu tesu-tesa janapadesu 
pobbåjetha upasampédetha. evañ ca pana bhikkhave 
pabbåjetabbo upasampAdetabbo: pathamam kesamas- 
sum ohåråpetvå, Каздуёпі vatthåni aochådåpetvå, ekamsam 
utterüsangam kåråpetvå, bhikkhünam påde vandåpetvå, uk- 
kutikam nisidåpetvå, afijalim pagganbåpetvå evam vadehiti 
vattabbo: 11311 buddham saranam gaochámi, dhammam sa- 
тарат gacohámi, samgham saranam gaochåmi, dutiyam pi 
buddham saranam gacohámi, dutiyam pi dhammam sarepam 
gacchåmi, dutiyem рі samgham saranam gaochåmi, tatiyam 
pi buddham earapam gacchåmi, tatiyam pi dhammam sa- 
ranam gsocbåmi, tatiyam pi samgham earanam gacohümiti, 
anvjånåmi bhikkbave imebi tihi saranagamanehi pabbajjam 
upasampadan ti. [|4 | 

tihi saranegamanehi upasampadakathé nitthit& 11911 


atha kho bhagavå vassam vuttho bhikkhü &mantesi: mayham 
kho bhikkhave yonisomanasikårå yonisosammappadhané anu- 
ttarå vimutti anuppattå anuttarå vimutti sacchikatA. tumhe pi 
bhikkhave yonisomanesikårå yonisosammappedhånå anutta- 
ram vimuttim anupåpunåtbe anuttaram vimuttim sacchikaro- 
tha "ti |1| atha kho Maro påpimå yena bhagavå ten’ upa- 
samkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam gåthåya sjjhabbåsi: 
baddho 'si Mårapåsehi ye dibbå ye ca månuså, 
mahñábandhanabaddho 'si, na me samana mokkhasiti.| 
mutt’ åbam MårapAsehi уе dibbå ye ca månuså, 
mahåbandhanemutto "mhi nibato tvam asi Antakå ’ti.| 


atha kho Måro påpimå jåuåti mam bhagavå, janéti mam 
sugato ‘ti dukkhi dummano tatth' ev’ anteradháyi. || 21131 


L 14. 1-8.) MAHÅVAGGA. 23 


atha kho bhagavå Bárápssiyam yatbåbhirantam viberitvå 
yena Uruvelá tena cárikam pakkámi. аа kho bhagavå 
maggå okkamme yena aññataro vanasando ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvé tam vanasandam sjjhogåhetvå afifletarasmirn 
rukkhamüle nisidi. tena kho pana samayens timsamattå 
Bhaddavaggiy4 sshüyaká sapsjåpatiké tasmim yeva vana- 
eande paricårenti. ekassa pajåpeti nåhosi, tase’ atthåys vest 
АНА ahosi. atha kho så veel tesu pamattesu paricårentesu 
bhandam Adaya pelàyittha. |111 atha kho te saháyak& sabå- 
yakassa voyyåvaccam karontå tam itthim gavesantå tam va- 
nasandam &bigdantà addasamsu bhagavantam aññetarasmim 
rakkbamåle nisinpam, disvåna yena bhagavå ten’ upasam- 
kamimsu, upesamksmitvå bhagavantam etad avooum: api 
bhante bhagavå okam itthim passeyyå 'ti. kim pana vo kumårå 
itthiyå ’ti idha mayam bhante timsamettà Bhaddavaggiyå 
sahåyakå sapajapatikA imasmim vanasande paricårayimhå, 
ekassa pajApati Dåhosi, tass” atthåya veel anita ahosi. atha 
kho så bhante ves? amhesu pamattesu paricárentesu bbandam 
ådåya palåyittha. tena meyam bbante sahåyalå sshdyakassa 
veyyåvaccam karontå tam itthim gavesantå imam vanasan- 
dam åhindAmå "ti. J2|| tam kim mafifistba vo kumårå, ka- 
tamam nu kho tumhåkam varam, yam vå tumhe itthim ga- 
veseyyåtha yam và attånam gaveseyyåthå 'ti. etad eva 
bhante ambåkam varam yam mayam ettánam gaveseyyåmå 
't. tena hi vo kumårå nisidstha, dhammam vo desessimiti. 
evam bhante 'ti kho te Bhaddavaggiy& sabüyak& bhagavan- 
tam abbivådøtvå ekamantam nisidimsu. |3|| team bhegavá 
anupubbikatham kathesi seyyath’ idam: dánakatham stla- 
katham saggskatham kåmånam ådinevam okåram samkilesam 
nekkhamme ánisamsam pakåsesi. yadå te bhsgavå afifidd 
kallacitte muducitte vinivarapacitte udaggaoitte pasannacitte, 
ве yá buddhánam såmukkamsiké dhemmadesanå, tam pa- 
káseni, dukkharn samudsyam nirodham maggam. seyyath&pi 
nåma suddham vattham apegatakAjakam sammad eva rajanam 
patigapheyys, evam eva (ева. tasmim yeva åsane virejam 
vitamalam dhammacakkhum udapådi yam kifici samudaya- 
dhammam sabba tam nirodhadhemmam ti.||4| te dittha- 
dhammå pattadhamma viditedhammå pariyogü]hadhamm& 


24 MAHAVAGGA. (1. 14. 5-18. 2. 


tinnavicikicché vigstakatbemketbå vesårsjjappattå aparap- 
paccayå sattbu s&sane bhagavantam etad avocum : labheyyå- 
ma mayam bhante bhagavato santike pabbajjam, labheyyåma 
upasampadan ti. etha bbikkhavo 'ti bbagavå avoca, svåk- 
khåto dhammo, caratha brahmacariyam sammå dukkhassa 
antakiriyåyå "ti. så 'va team åyasmantånam upasampedå 
ahosi. || 5 | 

Bhaddavaggiyessbåyekånam vatthum nitthi- 

tam 111411 dutiyakabbånsvåram. 


atha kho bbegavå anupubbena cårikam сагашёпо yena 
Uruvelå tad avasari. tena kho pana samayena Uruvelá- 
yam tayo jetilà pativasanti Uruvelakassapo Nadikassa- 
po Gayåkassapo ”ti. tesu Uruvelakaasspo jatilo paficannam 
jetilasatånem náyeko hoti vinåyako арро pamukho påmok- 
kho, Nadikassapo jatilo tipnem jetilasatånam n&yako hoti 
vinåyako арро pamukho påmokkho, GayAkassapo jatilo dvin- 
nam jatilasatinam n&yako hoti vinåyako aggo pamukho på- 
mokkho. |11 athe kho bhagavå yena Uruvelakasaapassa 
jatilassa assamo ten’ upasamkemi, upasamkamitvå Uruvela- 
kassapern jatilam etad avoca: saoo te Kassapa agaru, vasey- 
yåma ekarattam agyågåre 'ti. na kho me mabAsamana garu, 
cand’ ettba n&garáj& iddhim& &siviso ghoraviso, so tam må 
vihethesiti. dutiyam pi kho bhagavå Uruvelakassapam jati- 
lam etad avoca: sace te Kassapa agaru, vaseyyåma ekerattam 
agyågåre ti na kho me mahåssmena garu, cand’ ettha 
någaråjå iddhim& åsiviso ghoraviso, so tam må vihethestti. 
tatiyam pi kho bhagsvå Uruvelakassapam jatilam etad avocs : 
saco te Kassapa враги, vaseyyåms ekerattam agyågåre "ti. 
na kho me mahásamena garu, cand’ ettha någaråjå iddhimá 
åsiviso ghoraviso, so tam má vihethesiti. app eva mam na 
vihetheyya, їпрһа tvam Kassapa anujånåhi agyügáran ti. 
vihara mahásamana yatbåsukhan ti. ||2|| atha kho bhagevå 
agyågåram pavisitvå tipasantharakam pafifiåpetvå півійі pal- 
lankam Abbufijitva ujum káyam panidháya parimukham sa- 
tim upatthåpetvå. atha kho so någo bhagavantam pavittham 
addasa, disvana dukkhi dummano padhüpási. athe kho bha- 
gavato etad аһовї: yam nånåham imassa nügassa anupahacca 


I. 18, 3-7.) MAHAVAGGA. 25 


chavifi ca cammafl ca mamsañ ca nháruii ca atthiñ ca atthi- 
miñjañ ca tejasd tejam pariyådiyeyyan ti. |3| atha kho 
bhagavå tathüárüpam iddh&bhisamkháram abbisamkheritvå 
padhüpási. atha kho so någo makkham asahamAno pajjali. 
bhagavápi tejodhátum samåpejjitvå pajjali. ubhinnam sajo- 
tibhüt&ánam sgyågåram Adittam viya hoti sampajjalitam sajo- 
tibhütam. atha kho te jatilå agyågåram parivåretvå evam 
åhamsu : abhirüpo vata bho mahåsamano, någe ne vihethis- 
satiti 41 atha kho bhagavá tasså rattiyå accayena tassa 
någasss anupahacca chaviñ ca cammafi ca mameafi ca nhårufi 
са stthi ca atthimifijafi ca tejaså tejam pariyådiyitvå patte 
pakkhipitvà Uruvelakassapassa jatilassa dasseai: ayam te 
Kassapa någo, pariyådinno assa tejaså tejo 'ti. аа kho 
Uruvelakassapassa ја Шалва etad shosi: mabiddhiko kho ma- 
håsamano mahånubhåvo, yatra hi nåma candassa någaråjasss 
iddhimato Asivisassa ghoravisassa tejaså tejam pariyadiyiasa- 
ti, na tv етв ca kho arahå yathá ahan ti. 1511 

Nerafijaråyam bbagavå Uruvelakassapam jatilam avoca : 
sace te Kassapa agaru, viharemu ajjunho aggis&lamhtiti. ne 
kho me mahásamana garu, phåsukåmo "va tam nivåremi, cand’ 
ettha någaråjå iddhimå åsiviso ghoraviso, во tam må vihethe- 
siti. app eva mam na vihetheyya, ingha tvam Kassapa anujå- 
n&hi egyågåran ti, dinnan ti nam viditvå asambbito påvisi 
bhayamatito. disvå isim pavittham ahin&go dummano padhi- 
påsi eumánaso avimano manusssnågo pi tattha pedhüpási. 
makkhañ ca asahamáno ehinágo påvako va pejjali. tejodha- 
tusukusalo manussanügo pi tattha pajjali. ubbinnam sajoti- 
bhütánam sgyågåram udiccare jatilà: abhirüpo vata bho 
mabåsamano någe na vihethissatiti bhananti. ||6|| atha kho 
tasså rettiyå accayena hatå någassa acciyo honti, iddhimato 
pana thitå anekavannå acciyo honti, nilå atha lohitikå mañ- 
jetth& pitaké phalikavannAyo Angirasassa kaye aneksvannå 
acciyo honti. pattamhi odshitvå ahinågam bråhmanassa 
dassesi : ayam te Kassapa någo, pariyådinno assa tejaså tejo 
"ti. atha kho Uravelakassapo јао bhagavato iminå iddhi- 
pAtihériyena abhippasanno bhagavantam etad avoca: idh’ 
eva mahåsamans vihara, ahen te dhuvabhattenå "ti. [17 l| 

pethamam påtihåriyam. 1161 


26 MAIIÁVAGGA. (I. 16-17. 2. 


atha kho bhegavé Uruvelakassapesss jatilassa assamassa 
avidåre ailfiatarasmim vanasande vihåsi. atha kho cattdro 
Mah&r&jáno abhikkentáya rattiyá abhikkantavanpá keva- 
lakappam vanasapdam obhåsetvå yena bhagavå ten’ upasam- 
kamimso, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivådetvå catud- 
diså atthamsu seyyethåpi mahantà aggikkhandhå. 11| аа 
kho Uruvelakassapo jatilo tasså rattiyå accayena yena bha- 
вахё ten’ upasamkami, upasamlamitvå bhsgavantam etad 
avoca : kålo mahåaamans nitthitam bhattam. ke nu kho te 
mahåsamana abhikkantáys rattiyå abbikkantavannå kevala- 
kappam vanasandam obhbåsetvå yena {уаш ten’ upssamks- 
шітво, upasamkamitvå tam abhivüdetvà catuddiså atthamsu 
seyyathåpi mahanté aggikkhandhå 'ti. ete kho Kassapa 
oattåro Mahåråjåno yenüham ten’ upasamkamimsu dhamma- 
savanåyå "ti. atha kho Uruvelakassapassa jatilassa etad 
abosi: mahiddhiko kho mahåssmano mahånubhavo, yatra 
hi nåma cattáro pi Mabåråjåno upasamkamissaoti dhamma- 
savanåye, na tv eva ca kho arahå yatbå ahan ti. satha kho 
bhagavå Uruvelakassapesea jetilassa bhattam bhufljitvà tas- 
mim yeva vanasande vihåsi. || 2 || 

dutiyakapátib&áriyem. [116] 


atha kho Sakko devånam indo abhikkautåys rettiy& 
ebhikkantavappá kevalakappam vanasandam obhåsetvå yena 
bhagevá ten’ upasamkami, upesamkemitvå bhagavantam 
abhivådetvå ekamantam atthAai seyyetbåpi mahá aggikkhan- 
dho, pårimåhi vappanibháhi abhikkantataro ca panitataro 
oa. | lj atha kho Uruvelakassapo jatilo tasså rattiyå acca- 
yena yena bhagavá ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhaga- 
vantam etad evoca: kalo mahâsamaņa nitthitam bbattam. 
ko nu kho so mahüsamana abhikkantåya rattiy& abhikkanta- 
vanné kevalakappam vanasandam obhåsetvå yena tvam ten’ 
upasamkatni, upasamkemitvé tam abhivådetvå ekamantam 
ettbåsi веуувіћарі mehå eggikkhandho purimåbi vannani- 
bháhi abhikkantataro ca panitataro cå 'ti. eso kho Kassapa 
Sakko devånam indo yenåham ten’ upasamkami dbammasa- 
vanüyá "ti. atha kho Uruvelakassapasss jatilassa etad ahosi: 
mahiddhiko kho mahåsamano mahånubhåvo, yatra hi náma 


1.17, 3-19. 2.] MAHÅVAGGA. 27 


Sekko рї devånam indo upasamkamiesati dhammasavanåys, 
па бу eve ca kho arahá yathá ahan ti. atha kho bhagavå 
Uruvelakassapases jatilassa bhattam bhufljitvå tasmim yeva 
vanasande vihåsi. || 2 || 

tatiyakapatihdriyam. (171 


atha kho Brah má Sahampati abhikkantAya rattiyå abhi- 
kkantavanná kevalakappam vanasandam obhñsetvà yens bha- 
gavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvá bhagsvantam abhi- 
vådetvå ekamantam attbåsi seyyathåpi mahá aggikkhandho 
purimáhi vapnanibháhi abhikkantataro са panitataro os. [|l || 
atha kho Uruvelakassapo jatilo tasså rattiyå acoayena yena 
bhagavá ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam etad 
avoca: kAlo mahåsamana nitthitam bhattam. ko nu kho so 
mahAsamana abhikkantåye rattiyé abbikkentavannå kevala- 
kappam vanasandam obhåsetvå yena tvam ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå tam abhivådetvå ekamantam aithüai seyya- 
thåpi mah& aggikkhandho purimáhi vappanibháhi sbhik- 
kantataro са panitataro of 'ti. ево kho Kassapa Brahma 
Sahampati yendham ten’ upasamkemi dhammasavaniyé 'ti. 
atha kho Uruvelakassapesss jatilassa etad ahosi: mahiddhiko 
kho mahåsamano mehånubhåvo, yatra hi nåme Brahmåpi 
Sahampati upasamkemissati dhammasavanåye, ne tv eva са 
kho arabå yathå ahan ti. ва kho bhagavå Uravelakassa- 
passa jatilassa bhattam bhufijitvà tasmim yeva vanasande 
vihåsi. |2} 

catutthap&tiháriyam. [18] 


tens kho pena samayena Uruvelakassapassa jatilassa mshå- 
yañño paocupatthito hoti kevalakappå са Angemagadhá 
pahütam khádaniysm bhojaniyam &d&ya abhikkamitukAmé 
honti. atha kho Uruvelskassapassa jatilassa etad ahosi: 
etarahi kho me mahåyafifio paccupatthito kevalakappá ca 
Angamsgadhá pahütam khådaniyam bhojaniyam &dáya 
sbhikkemiseanti. sace mahfsamano mahåjanakåye iddhipå- 
tihåriyam kerissati, mahåsamanassa lübhasskkáro abhivad- 
dhisssti, mama låbbasekkåro paribüyissati. aho nüna mahå- 
samano svåtanåys någaccheyyå "ti 1111 atha kho bhagavå 


28 MAIIÁVAGGA. (1. 19. 2-20. 2, 


Uruvelakassspassa jatilassa cetaså-cetoparivitakkam айййув 
Uttarakurum gantvå tato pindapåtam åharitvå А notatta- 
даће paribhufijitvé tatth' eva divávihàrem akási. atha kho 
Urnvelakassapo jatilo tasså rattiyå accayens yena bhagavå ten’ 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvà bhagevantam etad avoca: kålo 
mahåsamana, nitthitam bhattam. kim nu kho mahåsamans 
hiyyo någamåsi. арі ca mayam tam saråma kim nu kho 
mahåsamano nAgacchatiti, khådaniyassa ca bhojaniyassa са te 
pativiso thapito "ti [9] nanu te Kassapa etad ahosi : etara- 
hi kho me mehåyafiflo paccupatthito kevalakappá ca Ánga- 
magadbå pahütam khådaniyam bhojaniyam Adaya abhikka- 
missanti. sace mahåsamano mahåjanakåye iddhipåtibåriyam 
kariesati, mahåsamanassa lábhasakkáro abhivaddhissati, ma- 
ma låbbasakkåro peribåyissati. aho nüna mebåssmano svå- 
tanåya nágacoheyy& ‘ti. |3|| во kho sham Kassapa tava 
cetaså cetoparivitakkam afifidya Utterakurum gantvå tato 
pindapåtam åberitvå Anotattadabe peribhufijitvà tatth’ eva 
divåvihåram akásin ti. atha kho Uruvelakassapasss jatilassa 
etad abosi: mahiddhiko kho mebåsamano mehånubhåvo, 
yatra hi náma cetasåpi cittam pajánissati, na tv eva ca kho 
агаһА yathå ahan ti. atha kho bhagavå Uruvelakassapassa 
jatilassa bhattam paribhufijitvé tasmim yeva vanasande vi- 
håsi. |1411 
paficamam patihériyam. |1911 


tena kho pana samayena bhagavato pamsuk(lam uppannam 
hoti. atha kho bhagavato etad ahosi: kattha nu kho abam 
pamsukülam dhoveyyen ti. atha kho Sakko devånam indo 
bhagavato cetasá cetoparivitakkam afiflåya påninå pokkhara- 
nim khanitvå bhagavantam etad avoca: idha bhante bhagavá 
pameukñlam dhovatü "ti. atha kho bhagavato etad’ ahosi : 
kimhi nu kho aham pamsukülam parimeddeyyan ti. atha 
kho Sakko devånam indo bhagavato cetaså cetoparivitakkam 
afifidya mebatim silam upsnikkhipi idha bhsnte bhegavå 
pamsukülam parimaddatü 'ti. |11 atha kho bhagavato etad 
abosi: kimhi nu kho aham ålembitvå uttareyyan ti. аа 
kho kakudhe adhivatthå devatå bhagavato cetaså cetopari- 
vitakkam afifidya sákham onamesi idha bbante bhagavå 


1. 90. 2-7] MAHÅVAGGA. 29 


ålambitvå uttaratü "ti. atha kho bhagavato etad ahosi: 
kimhi nu kho aham pamsukülam vissajjeyyan ti. atha kho 
Sakko devånsm indo bhagavato cetasá cetoparivitakkam 
айййуа mahatim silam upanikkhipi idha bhante bhagavå 
pamsukülam visssjjetå ”ti. |28 atha kho Uruvelakassapo 
jatilo tase rattiy& accayena yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå bhagavantam etad avoca: kalo mahåsamenas, 
nitthitam bhattam. kim nu kho mahåsamana nåyam pubbe 
idha pokkharapi, såyam idha pokkharapi, na yimå sili pubbe 
upanikkhitta, ken’ imá sila upanikkhittå, na yimassa kaku- 
dhasaa pubbe såkhå onatá, såyam såkhå onatá "ti. |131 idha 
me Kassapa pamsukülam uppannam ahosi, tassa mayham 
Kassaps etad ahosi: kattha nu kho aham pamsukülam dho- 
veyyan ti. аһа kho Kassapa Sakko devånam indo mama 
cetasá cetoparivitakkam afifidya pápin& pokkharanim kha- 
nitvà mam etad avoca: idha bhante bhagavà pamsukülam 
dhovatå 'ti. s&yam amanussena pápiná khanità pokkharani. 
tassa mayham Kasapa etad aboai: kimhi nu kho sham 
pemsukülam perimaddeyyen ti. atha kho Kassapa Sakko 
devånsm indo mame cetaså cetoparivitakkam айййув mahs- 
tim silam upanikkhipi idha bhante pamsukülam parimaddatà 
‘ti. sáyam amanussens nikkhittå sila. ||4|| tassa mayham 
Kassapa etad abosi: kimhi nu kho aham Alambitvé utta- 
reyyan ti. atha kho Kassapa kakudhe adhivatthå devatå 
mama cetaså cetoparivitakkam afifiåya såkham onamesi idba 
bhante bhagavå Alambitvé uttaratà 'ti. sv åyam åharahattbo 
kakudho. tassa maybam Kassapa etad ehosi: kimhi nu kho 
sham pamsukålam vissajjeyyan ti. atha kho Sakko devånam 
indo mama oetaså cetoparivitakkam afiflåya mshatim silam 
upanikkhipi idha bbante bhegavå pamsukülam visaajjet "ti. 
sÁyam amanusena nikkhittá silå ’ti. |5|| atha kho Uruvela- 
kansapassa jatilassa etad ahosi: mahiddhiko kho mahåssmano 
mabånubhåvo, yatra hi пАша Sakko devånam indo veyyå- 
vaccam karissati, na tv eva ca kho arahé yathå ahan ti. atha 
kho bhagavå Uruvelakassapases jatilaasa bhattam bhufijitva 
tasmim yeva vanasande vihåsi. || 61 

atha kho Uruvelakassspo jatilo tasså rattiyå accayene 
yena bhegavå ten’ upasamkami, upesamkamitvà bhaga- 


30 MAHÅVAGGA. [L 80. 7-11. 


vato kálam årocesi: kAlo mahåsamans nitthitam bhattan 
ti. gacoha tvem Kassapa, 4ydm’ ahan ti Urovelakassa- 
pam jetilam uyyojetvå y&ya jambuyåyam Jambudipo 
pafifidyeti, tato phalam pgahetvå pathamataram ågantvå 
agyågåre nisidi. ||7|| addasa kho Uruvelakassapo jatilo 
bhagavantam agyågåre nisinnam, disvàna bhagavantam 
etad avoca: katamena tvam mahásamana maggena Agato. 
aham tayå pathamataram pakkanto, so tvam pathama- 
teram ågantvå agyågåre nisinno "ti |8|| idh&ham Kassa- 
ра tam uyyojetvå yaya jambuyåyam Jambudtpo раййА- 
уай, tato phalam gahetvå pathamataram &gantvà agyå- 
gare nisinno. idam kho Kassapa jambuphalam vanna- 
sampannam gandhesampannam rasasampannam, васе Akan- 
khasi, paribbufijé 'ti. alam mabåsamene, tvam yev etam 
arahasi, (тар yev’ etam paribhufijáhtti. atha kho Uravela- 
kasanpasss jatilassa otad ahosi: mahiddhiko kho mahAsamano 
mabånubbårvo, yatra hi påms mam pathamataram uyyojetvå 
yåya jambuyåyam Jambüdipo pafifiåyati, tato phalam gahetvå 
pathamataram ågantvå agyågåre nisidissati, na tv eva са kho 
arabå yathå ahan ti. atha kho bhagavå Uruvelakassapasea 
jatilassa bhattam bhufijitvà tasmim yeva vanasande vihåsi. |19|| 
atha kho Uruvelaksssapo jatilo tasså rattiyå &ocayena yena 
bhagavá ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavato kålam 
Arocesi: kalo mahåsamans nitthitam bhattan ti gaccha 
tvam Kassape, &y&m' aban ti Uruvelakassapam jatilam uyyo- 
jetvå yya jambuy&yam Jambudipo pafiflåyati, tassA avidüre 
ambo —gha— (аавд avidüre Amalaki —la— (авай avidüre hart- 
taki —la— Távatimsam gantvå påricohattakapuppham gahe- 
två pathamataram ågantvå agyågåre nisidi, айдала kho 
Uruvelakaasapo ја о bhagavantam agyågåre uisinnam, dis- 
våna bhagavantam etad avoca: katamena tvam mahásamapa 
maggena ågato. aham tayå patbematarem pakkanto, so 
tvam pethamataram ågantvå agyágáre nisinno 'ti. [10] 
idh&ham Kasapa tam uyyojetvå Tåvatimsam gantvå pário- 
chattakapuppham gahetvå pathamataram ågantvå agyågåre 
nisinno. idam kho Kassapa påriochattakspuppham vanne- 
sampannam gandhasampannam, sace åkafikhasi, ganbA "ti 
alam mahåsamana, tvam yev’ etam arahasi, tvam yev’ etam 


1.90. 11-16) MAHÅVAGGA. 31 


ganhé ’ti. etha kho Uruvalakassapassa jatilessa etad ahosi: 
mahiddhiko kho mahåsamano mahánubhávo, yatra hi nåma 
mam pathamataram uyyojetvå Tåvatimsam gantvá pårie- 
chattakapuppham gabetvå pathamataram ågantvå agydgare 
nisidissati, па tv eva ca kho arahå ува aban ti. 1111 

tena kho pans samayena te jatilå aggt pericaritukåmå ne 
sakkonti kattháni phåletum. atha kho tesam jatilánam etad 
ahosi : nissamssyem kho mahåsamanssss iddhánubhávo, ya- 
thé meyam na sskkome kettháni pbåletun ti. atha kho 
bhagavå Uruvelakamapem jatilam etad avoca: pháliyantu 
Kasapa katthániti. phaliyanta mahdsamané "і. sakid eve 
peficakatthasatáni phåliyimsu. athe kho Uruvelakassapassa 
jetilassa etad ahosi: mahiddhiko kho mahássmapo mahå- 
nubhávo, yatra hi náma kattbåni pi pbåliyissenti, na tv eve 
са kho arahá yathá ahan ti. j 121 : tena kho pana samayena 
te jetilà agg? pericaritukámá na eakkonti aggi ujjaletum. 
atha kho tesam ја Шапат etad ahosi: nissamsayam kho 
mahåsamanassa iddhünubh&vo, yathá mayam na sakkoma 
aggt ujjaletun ti. atha kho bhagev& Uruvelakassapam jati- 
lam etad avoca: ujjaliyantu Kassapa aggiti. ujjaliyantu 
mahásamapá 'ti. sakid eve райса aggisatáni ujjalimsu. atha 
kho Uruvelakasaspasea jatilasss etad ahosi: mahiddbiko kbo 
mabåsamano mahånubhåvo, yatra hi náma aggi pi ujjeliyie- 
santi, na tv eva са kho arahå yath& ahan ti. 11811 tena kho 
pane samayena te jatilå aggi pericaritvå na sakkonti aggi 
vijjhåpetum. atha kho tesam jetilånam etad ehosi: nissam- 
sayam kho mahåsamanasss iddbånubbåvo, yathà meyam па 
sakkoma aggi vijjhåpetun ti. atha kho bhagavå Uruvela- 
kassaparn jefilam etad evoca: vijjhåyantu Kassapa aggiti. 
vijjhàyantu mahåsamanå ’ti sakid eva райса aggisatåni 
vijjhåyimsu. atha kho Uruvelakassapassa jatilassa etad 
ahosi: mahiddhiko kho mahåsameno mabánubhávo, yatra 
hi nåma aggi pi vijjháyissanti, па tv eva ca kho arahå yathå 
ahan ti. |14|| tens kho pana samayena te jetilå eitdsu 
hemantikásu rattisu antaratthaküsu himapátasamaye najjà 
Nerafijardyam nimujjenti pi, ummujjanti pi, ummujjani- 
mujjem pi karonti. athe kho bhegavå peficamattáni man- 
dåmokhisståni ebhinimmini, yattha te jetilå uttaritvå visib- 


39 MAHÁVAOGA. (I. 80. 15-18. 


besum. atha kho tesam jatilánam etad ahosi: nissamsayam 
kho mahfaamapassa iddh&ánubhávo, yathá h’ imå mandA- 
mukhiyo nimmitå ’ti. etha kho Uruvelakassapassa jatilassa 
etad ahosi: mahiddhiko kho mahåsamano mahånubhåvo, 
yatra hi ndme mahåmandåmukhiyo abhinimminissati, na tv 
eva са kho arabå yathå ehan ti. [151 tena kho pane sa- 
mayena mah&skülamegho vassi, mahåudakavåhako safijáyi. 
yssmim padese bhagavá viharati, so padeso udakena anuot- 
theto hoti. atha kho bhagavato etad shosi: yam nün&ham 
samantå udakam ussåretvå majjhe repuhatáya bhümiyá can- 
kameyyan ti. atha kho bbagavå samantå udakam ussåretvå 
majjhe renuhatáya bhümiyá cankami. atha kho Uruvela- 
kassapo jatilo må h’ eva kho mahåsamano udakena vulbo 
ehositi nåvåya sambahulehi jetilebi saddhim yasmim padese 
bhagavé vihareti tam padesam agamåsi. addasa kho Uru- 
velakassapo jatilo bhagavantam samantá udakam ussåretvå 
majjhe renuhatåye bhümiyà cankemantam, disvüna bhega- 
vantam etad evoca: idha nu tvam maháüsamená ”ti. ayam 
ah’ asmi Kassapå 'ti bbagavå vehåsam abbhuggantvá nåvåye 
paccutthási. atha kho Uruvelakassapassa jatilassa etad ahoai : 
mahiddbiko kho mahåsamano mabånubhåvo, yatra hi náma 
udakam pi пе pavabisssti, na tv eva са kho arahå vetbå ahan 
ti. 161) 

aths kho bhagaveto etad ahosi: ciram pi kho imasss 
moghapurisassa evam bhavisssti: mahiddhiko kho mahé- 
samano mabånubhåvo, na tv eva ca kho arahå yathá ahan 
ti. yam nün&ham imam jatilam samvejeyyan tL atha kho 
bhagavé Uruvelakassapam jatilam etad avoca: n' eve kho 
tvam Kassapa arahé, na pi arehattamaggam samåpenno, så 
pi te patipadà n’ atthi, yaya tvam erahà vå assa arahatta- 
maggam và samåpanno ”ti. atha kho Uruvelakassapo jatilo 
bbagaveto pådesu airaså nipatitva bhagsvantam etad avoca: 
labheyyåham bhante bhagavato santike pabbajjam, labhe- 
yyam upasampadan ti. [171 tvam kho 'si Kassapa pañ- 
cannam jatilasatinam nåyako vin&yako aggo pamukho på- 
mokkho, te pi {Ате apalokehi, yathá te mafifiissanti tathå 
karissantiti. atha kho Uruvelskassapo jatilo yena te jetilå 
ten’ upasarnkami, upasamkamitva te jatile etad avoca : icchAm’ 


I. 80. 16-33.J MAHÁYVAGGA. 33 


aham bho mahåsamane brahmacariyam caritum, yath& bha- 
vanto mafiflanti tathå karontü 'ti. cirepatikà mayam bho 
mahåsamane abhippasannå, sace bhavam mahüsamane brah- 
macariyam carissati, sabbeva mayam mabåsamane brahma- 
cariyam carissåmå ’ti. 11811 atha kho te jatilå keearnissam 
jatåmissam khårikåjemissam aggihuttemissam udake pavå- 
hetvå yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkamimsu, upesamkamitvà 
bhagavato pådesu siraså nipatitvå bhagavantam etad avocum: 
labbeyyåma mayam bhante bhagavato santike pabbajjam, 
labheyyåma upesampadan ti etha bhikkhavo 'ti bhagavå 
avoca, svåkkhåto dhammo, caratha brahmacariyam ssmmå 
dukkhassa antakiriyüyá 'ti. så 'và tesem &yasmantánam 
upasampedå ahosi. |1911 ` 

addasa kho Nadikassapo јао kesamissam jatÁmissam 
khárikájamissam aggihuttamissam udake vuyhamåne, disván' 
assa etad ahosi: må h’ eve me bhátuno upasaggo ehositi, 
jetile påhesi gacohatha me bhátaram jånAthå 'ti, sAmafl ca 
tibi jetilasatehi saddhim yenåyasmå Uruvelakassapo ten’ upa- 
samkami, apasarnkamitvå Ayasmantam Uruvelakassapam etad 
avoca: idam nu kho Kassapa seyyo 'ti. åmåvuso idam seyyo 
"і. 1201 atha kho te jetilå kesamissam jatåmissam khåri- 
kAjamissam aggihuttamissam udake pavåhetvå yena bbagavå 
ten’ upasamkemimsu, upasamkamitvå bhagaveto püdesu si- 
raså nipatitvà bhagavantam etad avooum: labheyyåma ma- 
yam bhante bhagevato santike pebbajjam, labbeyyåma upa- 
sampedan ti. etha bhikkhavo ’ti bhagavd avoca, svåkkhåto 
dhammo, caratha brahmacariyam sammå dukkhassa antakiri- 
yåyå ”ti. så va teeam dyaamantdnam upasampada ећові. 12111 

&ddasa kho Gayåkassapo jatilo kesamissam jatåmissam 
khArikAjamissam aggihuttamissam udake vuyhamåne, disvån” 
assa otad shosi: må h’ eva me bhátünam upasaggo ahositi, 
jatile påhesi gacchatha me bhátaro jånåtbå 'ti, såmaf ce 
dvihi jatilasatehi saddhim yenåyssmå Uruvelaksssspo ten’ 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvà &yasmantam Uruvelakassapam 
etad avoca: idam nu kho Kassapa seyyo "і. Amåvuso idam 
soyyo "ti. 1221 аһа kho te jatilA kesamiesam jatimissam 
kbhárik&jamissam aggihuttamissam udake pevåhetvå yene 
bhagsvå ten’ upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitvà bhagavato 


VoL, п. з 


34 MAHÅVAGGA. (I. 90. 23-81 4. 


pådesu siraså nipetitvå bhagavantam etad avocum: labhey- 
yåma mayam bhante bhagavato santike pabbajjam, labheyyå- 
ma upasampadan ti. etha bhikkhavo 'ti bbagavå nvoca, 
svåkkhåto dhemmo, carathe brahmacariyam sammá du- 
kkhassa antakiriyåyå 'ti. så 'va {ева Åyasmentånam upa- 
sampadå ahosi. |123 ll 

bhagavato adhitthánena райса katthasatAni na pháliyimsu, 
pbåliyimsu, aggi na ujjalimsu, vjjelimsu, na vijjbåyimsu, 
vijjhåyimsu, pafica mandámukhisatáni abhinimmini. etena 
nayens addhuddhapåtihåriyasshassåni honti. 112411201 


athe kho bhagavà Uruvelåyam yathábhirantam viharitvà 
yona Gaydsisam tena cárikam pakkámi mahatà bhikkhu- 
samghena saddhim bhikkhusabassena sabbeh’ eva puråna- 
jatilebi. tatra sadam bbagavå Gaydyam viharati Gayå- 
aise saddhim bhikkhusahassena. ||l|| tatra kho bhagavå 
bhikkhü &mantesi: sabbam bhikkhave Adittam kiñ ca 
bhikkhave sabbam ådittam. cakkhum bhikkhave Adittam, 
råpå ådittå, cakkhuvififiinam ådittam, cakkhusamphasso 
åditto, yad idam cakkhueamphassapaccaya uppajjati vedayi- 
tam sukham vå dukkham vå adukkhamesukham và, tam pi 
Adittam. kena ådittam, rågagginå dosagginå mobagginå 
Adittam, jåtiyå jgráya maranens sokebi paridevehi dukkhehi 
domanassehi upáy&sehi Adittan ti vadåmi. |211 sotam ådittam, 
saddå 44114, — la — ghánam ådittam, gandh& ådittå, jivhà 
dittà, raså &dittà, kåyo Aditto, photthabbå ådittå, mano 
Aditto, dhammå ådittå, manoviññánam ådittam, manosam- 
phasso Aditto, yad idam manosamphassapacceayå uppajjati 
vedayitam sukham vA dukkham và adukkhamasukham vA, 
tam pi ådittam. kena Adittam, rågagginå dosagginå moha- 
gginå Adittam, jåtiyå jaråye maranena sokehi paridevehi 
dukkhehi domanassehi upåyåsebi Adittan ti vadåmi. ||3|| 
evam passam bhikkhave eutavå eriyasåvako cakkhusmim pi 
nibbindati, råpesu pi nibbindati, cakkhuvififiane pi nibbinda- 
ti, cakkhusamphasse pi nibbindati, yad idam cakkhusam- 
phassapaccaya uppajjati vedayitam sukham vå dukkham vå 
adukkhemasukham vá, tasmim pi nibbindati sotaswim pi 
nibbindati, saddeeu pi nibbindati, ghünammim pi nibbin- 


L SL 4-22. 3.) MAHÁYAGGA. 35 


dati, gandhesu pi nibbindati, jivhåye pi nibbindati, ra- 
seen pi nibbindsti, kayasmim pi nibbindati, photthabbesu 
pi nibbindsti, manasmim рі nibbindati, dbammesu pi 
nibbindati, manoviññáne рі nibbindsti, manosamphasse 
pi nibbindati, yad idam manosamphassapaccayA uppajjati 
vedayitam sukham vå dukkbam vå adukkhamasukham 
và, tasmim pi nibbindati, nibbindam virajjati, virågå vi- 
muccati, vimuttasmim vimutt' ambiti fanam hoti, khip& 
jåti, vusitam brehmecariyam, katam kareptyam, n&param 
itthattåyå 'ti peján&tiG. imasmim ca pana veyy&ákaranasmim 
bbafifiamåne tasa bhikkhusahessasss enupüdáya Asavebi 
eittåni vimuccimsu. |141 ådittaepariyåyam nitthitam. 
1211 Uravelapatihdriyam tetiyekabhånavåram 
nitthitam. 


atha kho bhagavå Gayáüsise yathAbhirantam viharitvå yena 
Rájegsham tena cårikam pekkåmi mabatà bhikkhusam- 
ghena saddhim bhikkhusahassena sabbeh' eva purånsjatilehi. 
atha kho bhagavå enupubbena cárikam caramino yena Råja- 
gaham tad avasari. tatra sudam bbagavå Råjagahe viharati 
Latthivanuyyåne Supatitthe oetiye.||l|| assosi kho 
rájà Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisáro: samano khalu bho 
Gotamo Sekyaputto Sakyakulå pabbejito Ràjagsham anu- 
ppatto Råjagahe viharati Latthivanuyyåne Supatitthe oetiyo. 
tam kho pena bhagavantam Gotamam evam kalyápo kitti- 
saddo gbbhuggato iti pi, so bbagavå eraham sammásam- 
buddho vijjácarapasampanno sugato lokavidü anuttaro puri- 
sadammasárgthi satthå devamanussánam buddho bhagavå, 
so imam lokam sadevakam samårakam eabrehmakam sassa- 
manabråhmanim pajam sadevamanussam ssyam sbhififlå 
mochikatvå pavedeti, so dhammam deseti ådikalyånam majjhe- 
kalyåpam pariyoeånakalyånem eàttham savyafijanam keva- 
laparipunnam parisuddham brahmacariyam pekáseti. sådhu 
kho репа tathárüpánam arahatam dassanam hotiti. |211 atha 
kho råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro dvådasanshutehi Måga- 
dhikehi bråbmanagahapetikehi perivuto yena bhagavå ten’ 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abbivådetvå ekam- 
antam nisidi te pi kho dvádasanahutá Mágedhik& brab- 


36 MABAVAGGA. [I. 88. 3-7. 


managahapatikå appekacce bhagavantam abhivådetvå ekam- 
antam nisidimsu, appekacce bhagavatå saddhim sammo- 
dimsu, sammodaniyam Кафа sárapiyam vitisåretvå ekam- 
antam nisidimsu, appekacce yena bhagavå ten’ efljalim 
panåmetvå ekamantam nisidimsu, appekacce bhagavato san- 
tike nåmagottam såvetvå ekamantam nieidimsu, врекассе 
tanhibhdta ekamantam nisidimsu. 3|] atha kho tesam dvå- 
dasanshutånem Mågadbikånam — bráhmanagahapatikánam 
etad аһовї: kim nu kho mahåsamano Uruvelakassape brah- 
macariyam carati, udåhu Uruvelakassapo mabdsamane brah- 
mecariyam caratiti. atha kho bbagavå teeam dv&dasanahu- 
tånam Mågadhikånam bráhmsnagahapatikánam oetaså ceto- 
parivitakkam afifiåya áyasmantam Uruvelakassapam gåthåys 
ajjhabhåsi : 
kim eva disvå Uruvelavåsi pabåsi aggim kisako vadåno. 
pucchámi tam Kassapa etam attham, katham pahinam 
tava aggihuttan ti.| 
rape ca sadde ca афо rase ca kAmitthiyo o&bhivadanti 
yafifia. 
etam malan ti upadbisu flatvé, tasmá na yitthe na hute 
arafijin ti. |J4 || 
ettha ca te mano па ramittba Kassapå ’ti bhagavå avoca, 
råpesu saddesu atho rasesu 
atha ko carahi devamanussaloke rato mano Kassapa brübi 
me tan ti.| 
disvå padam santam anupadhikem akificanam kåmsbhave 
asattam 
anefiflathåbhåvim anafiflaneyyam, tasmå na yitthe na hute 
arafijin ti. || 5 


atha kho åyasmå Uruvelakassapo uttháyüsaná ekamsam 
uttarüsangam karitvå bhagevato pådesu siraså nipatitvå bha- 
gavantam etad avoca: satthå me bhante bhagavü, såvako 
"ham ваші, satthå me bhante bhagavá, såvako 'ham ssmiti 
atha kho tesam dvådasanahutånam Mágadhikánam bråhma- 
nagahapatikánam etad ahosi: Uruvelakassapo mahåsamane 
brahmacariyam carstiti. |61 atha kho bhagavå tesam dvå- 
dasanshutánam Mågadhikånam bråhmanagahapetikånem ce- 


L 893. 7-11.) MAHAVAGGA. 37 


taså cetoparivitakkam afidåya anupubbikatham kathemi se- 
yyath’ idam: dánakatham sflakatham saggakatham kámüánam 
Adinavam okåram eamkileeam nekkhamme ånisamsam paká- 
mesi. yadå te bhagavå afifiåsi kallacitte muducitte vinivarana- 
aitte udaggaoitte pasannacitte, atha yñ buddhånam såmu- 
kkarpsikå dhammadesaná, tam pakåsesi, dukkham ssmuds- 
yam nirodham maggam. ||7|| seyyethåpi nåma suddham 
vattham apagatakåjakam sammad eva rajanam patigapheyya, 
evam eva ekådasanahutånam Mågadhikånam brihmapagaha- 
patikånam Birnbisårapamukbånam tasmim yeva Åsane vira- 
jam vitamalam dhammaoakkbum udapédi yam kifici samuda- 
yadhammam sabbam tam nirodhadhamman ti, ekanehutam 
upåsakattam pativedesi. ||811 atha kho råjå Mågadho Seniyo 
Bimbisåro ditthadhammo pattadhammo viditadhammo pari- 
yogålhadhammo tinnsvicikiocho vigatakathamkatho vesá- 
rajjappatto aparappaccayo satthu sásane bhagavantam etad 
&voca: pubbe me bhante kumårassa sato райса assåsakå 
ahesum, te me etarahi samiddh&, pubbe me bhante kumårassa 
sato etad ahosi: sho vata mam rajje abbisificeyyan ti, 
ayam kho me bhante pathamo assåsako ahosi, зо me eterahi 
samiddho. tassa са me vijitam arabam sammésambuddho 
okkameyy4 ’ti, ayam kho me bhante dutiyo ass&sako ahosi, 
so me etarahi samiddho. ||9| tañ cdham bhagavantam 
payirupáseyyan ti, ayam kho me bhante tatiyo assåsako 
&hosi, so me etarahi samiddho. so ca me bhagavé dhammam 
deseyya ’ti, ayam kho me bhante catuttho assåaako ahosi, 
so me etarahi samiddho. tassa cáham bhagavato dhammam 
&jåneyyan ti, ayam kho me bhante райсашо assåsako ahosi, 
во me etarahi samiddho. pubbe me bhante kumárassa sato 
ime рейса assásakA ahesum, te me etarahi samiddhé. ||10]| 
abhikkantam bhante, abhikkantam bhante, seyyathápi bhante 
nikkujjitam va ukkojjeyye paticchannam và vivareyys 
målhassa và maggam &cikkheyya andhakáre vå telapajjotam 
dhåreyya cakkhumanto rüpáni dakkhintiti, evam eva bhaga- 
vatå anekapariyåyena dhammo pakåsito. ев’ åham bhante 
bhagavantam sarapam gacchåmi dhammañ ca bhikkhusam- 
ghañ ca, upåsakam mam bhante bhagavå dhéretu ajjatagge 
pánupetam sarapam gatan ti, sdhivüsetu са me bhante 


38 MAHÅVAGGA. | (L. 28. 11-16. 


bhagavå svåtsnåye bhattam saddbim bbikkhusamghená ’ti. 
adbivåsesi bhagavà tunhibhávena. |1111 atha kho raja 
Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro bhagavato adhivåsanam viditvå 
utthåyåsanå bhagavantam abhivådetvå padakkhinam katvå 
pakkümi. atha kho råjå Mågadho Beniyo Bimbisáro tasså 
rattiyå aocayena panitam khadaniyam bhojaniyam petiy&dá- 
petvå bhagavato kålam årocåpesi: kalo bhante, nitthitam 
bhattan ti. otha kho bhagavà pubbanhesamayam nivåsetvå 
pattactvaram Adåya Råjegaham påvisi mahaté bhikkhusam- 
ghena saddhim bhikkhusshassena sabbeh' eva pardnajati- 
lebi. 1121 tena kho pane samayena Sakko devånam 
indo månavakavannam abhinimminitvå buddhapamukhassa 
bhikkhusamghassa purato-purato gacohati imå gåtbåyo giya- 
måno : 
danto dantehi ааһа purånsjatilehi vippamutto vippamuttebi 
eingiuikkhasuvanpo Råjagaham påvisi bhegavå.| 4i 
mutto muttehi sahe purånsjetilebi vippamutto vippa- 
muttebi 
einginikkhesavanno Råjagaham påvisi bhagavå.| 
tinno tinnehi sahs purånsjatilehi vippemutto vippemuttehi 
singinikkhesavanno Rajagaham pávisi bhagavå.| 
dasavåso dasabalo dasadhammavidü dasabhi о’ upeto ` ' 
so dasasataparivàro Råjagaham påvisi bhagavA 'ti. 111911 
manusså Sakkam devånam indam passitvå evam &hamsu: 
abhirüpo vatåyam månsvako, dassaniyo vatåyam månavako, 
påsådiko vatåyam m&navako. kasaa nu kho ayam mánavako 
‘ti, evam vutte Sakko devånam indo te manusse gåthåya 
ajjbabhåsi : 
yo dhiro sabbadht danto buddho appatipuggalo 
araham eugato loke tassåham paricárako "ti. [|14] 
atha kho bhagavå yena rafifio Mégadhassa Beniyassa 
Bimbisårassa nivesanam ten’ upasamkami, upssamkamitvå 
pafifiatte Asane nisidi saddhim bhikkhusamghena atha 
kho råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro buddhapamukham 
bhikkhusamgham panitens khAdaniyens bhojaniyena sa- 
hatthå santeppetvå sampevåretvå bhagaventam bhuttåvim 
onitapattapånim ekamantam nisidi. |151 eksmantam ni- 


L. 88. 16-93. 2.] MAHAVAGGA. 39 


sinnassa kho rañño Magadhasss Seniyassa Bimbisárasaa 
etad shosi: kattha nu kho bhagavå vihareyya, yam assa 
gåmato п’ eva avidüre па вссАваппе gamanågsmana- 
sampannam stthikánam-etthikánum manossånam abhikka- 
maniyam, divå eppékimpam rattim appasaddam appeni- 
gghosam vijanavåtam maenussarühaseyyekam  patisallünasá- 
ruppan ti. |161 аа kho rañño Mågadhassa Seniyasss 
Bimbisárassa etad ahosi: idam kho ambåkam Ve]uvanam 
uyyånam gåmato n’ eva avidüre na aocásanne gamanágama- 
nasampannåm atthikAnam-atthikAnam manussinam abhikka- 
maniyam, divå appákinpam, rattim appesaddam appaniggho- 
eam vijanavütam manussaréhaseyyakam patisallånasåruppam. 
yam nûnåham Vejuvanam uyyánam buddhspamukhassa 
bhikkhusamghassa dadeyyan ti. 171 ва kho råjå Måga- 
dho Beniyo Bimbisåro sovannamayam bhinkåram gahetvå 
bhagavato onojesi etåham bhante Veluvanam uyyánam 
buddhapamukhassa bhikkhusamghassa dammiti. patiggaheai 
bhagevå &árámam. atha kho bhagavå råjånam Mågadham 
Seniyam Bimbisáram dhammiyé kathéya sandassetvå samå- 
dapetvå samuttejetvà sampshamsetvé utthåyåsanå pakkAmi. 
&tha kho bhagavá etasmim nidåne dhammikatham katvå bhi- 
kkhå Amantesi: anuján&mi bhikkhave &r&áman ti, [181221 


tens kho pana samayens Safijayo paribbåjako Råjagahe 
pativasati mahetiyå paribbåjakeperisåye saddhim addha- 
teyyebi paribbåjakasatehi. tena kho pena samayena Såri- 
puttsmoggellånå Safijsye peribb&jake brahmacariyam 
caranti, tehi katiké katå hoti: yo pathamam amatam adhi- 
gacohati so ürooetü 'ti. |11 atha kho åyasmå Asssji 
pubbanhasamayam nivåsetvå pattacivaram ådåya Rajagaham 
pindåye pávisi påsådikena abhikkantens patikkantens &loki- 
tena vilokitens sammifijitena рездгіќепа okkhittecakkha 
iriyåpathasampanno. addasa kho Såriputto paribbåjako 
åyasmantam Assajim Råjegahe pindáya carantam påsådikene 
abhikkantena patikkantena Alokitena vilokitena sammifijitena 
pasáritena okkhittacakkhum iriyApathasampannam, disván' 
assa etad ahosi: ye vata loke arahanto vå arahattamaggam va 
aamåpannå, ayam tesam bhikkhünam afiflataro, yam nün&- 


40 MAHÅVAGGA. (I. 23. 2-6. 


ham imam bhikkhum upasamkamitvå puccheyyam : kam ‘si 
tvam åvuso uddissa pabbejito, ko và te satthå, kassa và tvam 
dhammam rocesiti. |2|| stha kho Sáriputtassa peribbåja- 
kassa etad shosi: akålo kho imam bhikkhum puochitum, 
antaragharam pavittho pindåya carati. yam nünüham imam 
bhikkhum pitthito-pitthito anubandheyyam atthikehi ups- 
fifidtam meggan ti. atha kho áyasmá Aessji Råjagahe 
pindáya caritvå pindapåtam Adaya patikkami. atha kho 
Såriputto paribbajako yenåyasmå Assaji ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå Ayasmaté Assajiná saddhim sammodi, sam- 
modantyam katham såranfyam vitisåretvå ekamantam atthá- 
si, ekamantam thito kho Såriputto paribbåjako åyasmantam 
Assajim etad avoca: vippasannåni kho te åvuso indriyåni, 
perisnddho chavivanno pariyodåto, kam ‘si tvam Avuso 
uddissa pebbejito, ko vå te satthå, kassa và tvam dhammam 
rocesiti. 11311  atth' Avuso maháüsamano Sakyaputto Sakya- 
КОЈА pabbajito, tåham bhagavantam uddissa pabbejito, so са 
me bhagavå satthé, tassa cáham bhagavato dhammam roce- 
miti. kimvådi pandyasmato satthå kimakkháyiti. aham 
kho vaso navo acirapabbajito adhunågato imam dhamma- 
vinayam, ns t' &ham sakkomi vitthårens dhammam desetum, 
api ca te samkhittena attham vakkhámiti, atha kho Séri- 
putto paribbåjako &yesmantam Assajim etad avoca: hotu 
Avuso, appam và bahum vå `ЫһАвазеп, attham yeva me bråhi, 
atthen’ eva me attho, kim kåbasi vyafijanam bahun ti [|4 | 
atha kho âyasmå Аввајі Sériputtessa paribbAjakassa imam 
dhammapariyåyam abhaai : 


ye dhammé hetuppabhavå tesam hetum tathágato Aha 
tesañ ca уо nirodho evamvådt mahåaamano "ti. 


atha kho Sériputtassa paribbajakassa imam dhemmapariyå- 
yam sutvå virsjam vitamalam dhammacakkhum udapådi 
yam kifici samudayadhammam sabbam tam nirodhadham- 
man ti. es’ eva dhammo yadi tåvad eva paccavyathá padam 
asokam adittham abbhatitam bahukehi kappanahutehiti. || б || 
atha kho Såriputto paribbåjako yena Moggallåno paribbåjako 
ten’ upasamkami. sddass kho Moggalláno paribbåjako Såri- 
puttam peribbåjakam dürato 'va Agacohantam, disvAna Såri- 


L$. 6-10] MAHÅVAGGA. 41 


puttam paribbåjekem etad avoca : vippasannåni kho te &vuso 
indriy&ni, parisuddho ohavivanno pariyodåto, kacoi nu tvam 
åruso amatam adhigato "і.  &mávauso amatam adhigato 
'tü.  yathá katham pana tvam Avuso amatam adhigato 
"ti 161 idbåham åvuso eddasam Assajim bhikkhum Råje-. 
gahe pindays carantam pásádikena abbikkantens petikkan- 
tena ålokitena vilokitena sammiiijitena pasáritena okkhitta- 
cakkhum iriy&ápathesampannam, disvåne me etad ahosi: ye 
vata loke arahanto vå arahattamaggam và samåpannå, ayam 
tesam bhikkhünam afifiataro, yam nün&ham imam bhikkhum 
upasamkamitvà puccheyyam: kam 'si tvam åvuso uddissa 
pabbajito, ko vA te satthå, kassa vå tvam dhammam roce- 
siti. 170 tame mayham åvuso etad ahosi: akálo kho imam 
bhikkhum puochitum, antaragharam pavittho pindáya carati. 
yam nün&ham imam bhikkhum pittbito-pittbito anubandhe- 
yyam attbikehi upafifiåtam maggan ti atha kho Avuso 
Assaji bhikku Rájagehe pindåya caritvå pindap&tam ådåya 
petikkami atha khv &hsm avuso yene Assaji bbikkhu 
ten’ upasamkamim, upesamkamitvà Assajind bhikkhunà 
eaddhim sammodim, sammodaniyam ketham sárapiyam vi- 
tisåretvå ekamantam etthåsim, ekamantam thito kho aham 
åvuso Ascajim bhikkhum etad avocam : vippasannåni kho te 
åvuso indriyåni, parisuddho chavivanno pariyodåto, kam "si 
tvam Атизо uddissa pabbajito, ko vå te satthå, kassa và 
tvam dhammam rocesiti. ||| atth’ &vuso mahåsamano 
Bekyeputto Sakyakulå pabbejito, taham bhagavantam uddissa 
pabbajito, so ca me bhagavå satthá, tassa cåbam bhagavato 
dhammam rocemiti. kimvådi panåyasmato satthå kimakkhå- 
yiti. aham kho åvuso navo acirapabbajito adhunågato imam 
dhammavinayam, na t' Sham sakkomi vitthårens dhammam 
desetum, api са te eamkhittena attham vekkbåmtti. appam 
và bahum vå bháaaseu, attham yeva me brühi, atthen' eva 
me attho, kim kahasi vyafijanam bahun ti. |1911 atha kho 
Avuso Assaji bhikkhu imam dhammaperiy&áyam ebbåsi: 
ye dhammå hetuppabhevå tesam hetum tathågato Aha 
{евай са уо nirodho evamvádi mahåsamayo "ti. 


atha kho Moggallénasss peribbåjaksssa imam dhammapari- 


42 MAHÅVAGGA. LI. 83. 10-94. 4. 


yåyam sutvå virajam vitamalam dhammacakkhum udapádi 
yam kifici eamudsyadhammam sabbam tam mnirodhadha- 
mman ti. es’ eva dhammo yadi tåvad eva paccavyathå 
padam asokam adittham abbhatitam bahukehi kappanahute- 
hiti. 110128 


atba kho Moggellåno paribbåjako Sariputtam pa- 
ribbåjakam etad avoca: gacchåma mayam åvuso bhagavato 
santike, so no bhagavå satthá ’ti. imåni kho àvuso addha- 
teyyåni paribbåjakssatåni amhe nissåys amhe sampassantå 
idha viharanti, te pi táva epalokàáma, ystbå te maññissanti, 
tathå karissentiti. atha kho Såriputtamoggallånå yena te 
paribbåjakå ten’ upasamkemimsu, upasamkamitvá te paribbá- 
jake etad avocum: gucoháma mayam ávuso bhagavsato san- 
tike, so no bhagavå sattbå ‘ti. mayam Ayasmante nissÁya 
åyasmante sampassantå idha viharüma, sace ñyasmantá ma- 
håsamane brahmacariyam carissanti, sabbeva mayam mahå- 
eamane brahmacariyam carissAmå 'ti. |1|| atha kho Såri- 
puttamoggallånå yena Safljayo paribbåjako ten’ upasamka- 
mimsu, upasamkamitvå Safijayam paribbåjakam etad avooum : 
gaccháma msyam Avuso bhagavato santike, so no bhagavå 
satthå 'ti. alam åvuso má agamittha, sabbeva tayo imam 
ganam paribarissåmå 'ti. dutiysm pi kho —la— tatiyam 
pi kho Såriputtamoggallånå Safijeyam paribbåjakam otad 
avocum: gacohåma mayam Åvuso bhagavato santike, во no 
bhagavà ваа 'ti alam avuso må agamitthe, sabbeva 
tayo imam ganam pariharissåmå ’ti. |2|| atha kho Såriputta- 
, moggallånå tani addhateyyüni paribbåjakasståni ådAya yena 
Vejuvanam ten’ upasamkamimeu, Safijayassa pana paribbåja- 
kassa tatth’ eva upham lohitam mukhato ugguochi. addass 
kho bhagavá te Såriputtamoggallåne dårato 'va Agacchante, 
disvåna bhikkhü &mantesi: ete bhikkhave dve sshAyakA 
&gacchanti Kolito Upatisso ca, etam me sAvakayagam 
bhavissati aggam bhaddsyugan ti. gambhire flüpavisaye 
anuttare upadhisamkhaye vimutte anuppatte Ve]uvanam 
atha ne satthá vyåkåsi: ete dve sahåyakå ágacohanti Kolito 
Upatiaso ca, etam me såvakayugam bhevissati sggam bbadda- 
yugan ti. 131 atha kho Såriputtamoggallånå yena bhagavå 


ІМ 4-7.) MAHÁYAOGA. 43 


ten’ upasamkamimsu, upasamkemitvà bhagavato pådesu 
siraså nipetitvå bhagavantam etad avocum : IsbheyyAma 
meyam bhante bbegavato santike pabbajjam, labheyyáma 
upasampedan ti. etha bhikkhavo 'ti bhagavå avoca, svå- 
kkháto dhammo, caratha brahmacariyam sammá dukkhassa 
antakiriyåyå 'ti. sà 'va tesam &yasmantánam upasampadá 
show. ||| tena kho pena samayena abhiññAtá-abhiññAta 
MågadbikA kulapattà bhagavati brahmacariyam  caranti. 
manussá ojjbàyenti khiyanti vipdcenti: aputtakatåya pati- 
panno samano Gotamo, vedhavydys patipanno samano Gota- 
mo, kulupaoohedåya patipanno samano Gotamo. idåni anena 
jatilasahaseam pabbajitam, imåni са addhateyyáni paribbåja- 
kasatåni Вайјауёпі pabbåjitåni, ime ca abhifiBátA-abhinilAtA 
Mågadhiké kulsputtå samane Gotame brahmacariyam ca- 
rantiti api 'ssu bhikkhü disvå imAya gåthåye codenti : 

Agato kho mabåssmano Magadhånam Giribbajam 

sabbe Safijaye netvåne, kam su dani nayissatiti. |! 5 || 
assosum kho bhikkhü tesam manussånam ujjháyantánam 
kbiyantånam vipácentánam. atha kho te bbikkhå bhagavato 
etam attham Arocesum. na bhikkhave so saddo ciram bha- 
vissati, sattdham eva bhavissati, satt&hassa accayena antara- 
dháyissati. tena hi bhikkhave ye tumhe imåya gåthåye 
codenti : 

Agato kho mabåsameno Magadbånam Giribbajam 

sabbe Safijaye netvåna, kam su dåni nayissatiti, 
te tumhe imåya gåthåya paticodetha : 

nayanti ve mahávirá saddhammena tathågatå, 

dhammens nayamånånem ka usayyé vijånatan ti. ||6 || 
tena kho рапа вашауепа manusså bhikkhü disvå imåya gå- 
tháya codenti : 

ågato kho mahåsamano Magadbånam Giribbajam 

sabbe Safijaye netvåne, kam su dáni nayissstiti. 
bhikkhü te manusse imåya gåthåya peticodenti : 

nayanti ve mabåvirå saddhammena tathågatå, 

dhammena naysmånånem kA usuyyå vijánstan ti. 


44 MAHÅVAGGA. П. 94. 7-80. 4. 


manusså dbammens kira samanå Sakyaputtiyé nenti no 
adhammenå ’ti eattaham eva so saddo ahosi, sattáhassa acca- 
yene antaradbåyi. |17 | 
Båriputtamoggallånapebbajjå nitthitå. 1341 
catutthakabhénavdram nitthitam. 


tena kho pana samayena bhikkhü anupajjhdyaké anova- 
diyamånå ananusásiyamánà dunnivatthá duppårutå an&kappa- 
sampanuå pindáya caranti. te manussånam bhufjjernånånem 
upari bhojane pi uttitthapattam upandmenti, upari khådaniye 
pi uttitthapattam upan&menti, upari såyaniye pi uttittha- 
pettam upapåmenti, upari påniye pi uttitthapattam upanå- 
menti, såmam айрат pi odanam pi vilil&petvà bhuffjanti, 
bhattagge pi uccásaddá mabåsaddå viharanti. || || manusså 
ujjbåyanti khiyanti vipåcenti: katham hi паша samapá 
SakyaputtiyA dunnivattbå duppårutå andkappasampannd 
pindáye carissanti, manussånam bhufijamånånam upari bho- 
jene pi uttitthapattam upandmessanti, upari khádaniye pi 
uttitthepattam upanåmessanti, upari sáyaniye pi uttittha- 
pettam upanåmessanti, upari pániye pi uttitthapattam upand- 
messanti, såmam süpam pi odanam pi viññápetv& bhufiji- 
asanti, bhattagge pi uccAsaddå mehåsaddå viharissanti, sevya- 
thåpi bråhmanå bråhmanabbojene ‘ti. ||2|| assosum kho 
bhikkhü tesam manussdnam ujjbåyantånam khiyentånam 
vipåcentånam. ye te bhikkhü appicchå santuttbå lajjino 
kukkuccaká sikkbåkåmå, te ujjbåyanti khiyanti vipåcenti: 
ketham hi nama bhikkhé dunnivatthå doppårutå andkappa- 
sampannå pindáya carissanti, manussånam bhufljamånånam 
upari bhojane pi uttitthapattam upanåmessanti, upari khåde- 
niye pi uttitthapattam upanåmessanti, upari sáyaniye pi utti- 
tthapattam upanámessanti, upari pániye рі uttitthapattam 
upanåmessanti, såmem sûpam pi odenem pi viflilåpetvå 
bhufijissanti, bhattagge pi uccásadd& mahåsaddå viherissantt- 
ti. 131 atha kho te bhikkhà bhagavato etam ваш årooe- 
sum. atha kho bhagavá etasmim nidáne etasmim pakarane 
bhikkhusamgham sannipåtåpetvå bhikkhå petipucchi: saocam 
kira bhikkhave bhikkhü dunnivetthà duppårutå an&kappa- 
sampannå pindáya caranti manussinam bhufljamånånam 


L 25. 4-7.) ° MAHÅVAGGA. 45 


spari Hani pi алата menne: upari d 


TEMA араш Е PRESS pi ViBápetvà bhuffjenti, анар 
рі uccåsaddå mahåsaddå viharantiti. saccam bhagavå. ||4|| 
vigaruhi buddho bhegavå : ananucchaviyam bhikkhave tesam 
moghapurisånam ananulomikem appatirüpam sssimanakam 
akappiyam ekerapiyam.  katham bi náma te bhikkhave 
mogbapuriså dannivattbå duppårutå апАШарразашраппф 
pindàye carissanti, manussánam bhufijamánünem upari bho- 
jane pi uttitthapattam upanåmessanti upari khádaniye pi 
uttitthapettam upanåmessanti, upari såyaniye pi uttittha- 
pattam upanåmessanti, upari paniye pi uttitthapattam upanå- 
memsanti, sàmam вйраш pi odansm pi viññápetvá bhufijis- 
santi, bhattagge pi uccássdd& mabåsaddå viharissanti. n’ 
etam bhikkhave appasannånam vá pasådåye pesannánam và 
bhiyyobhåvåye, atha kho tam bhikkhave appasannånafi с” 
eva appasådåye, pasann&nafi ca ekaccánam aififlathattdyd 
"ti. 151 athe kho bhagavå te bhikkhO anekapariyfyens viga- 
rahitvå dubbharetåya dupposatåya mahiochat&ya asantutthiyA 
samganikdya koeajjasss avannam bhåsitvå anekapariyåyene 
subbaratåya suposatåya аррїосһалза santutthaasa sallekhassa 
dhutassa pásádikassa apacayassa viriyárembhassa vanpam 
bhásitvà bhikkhünam tadanucchavikam tadanulomikam 
dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü mantesi: enujånåmi bhi- 
kkhave upsjjhåyem. upajjhayo bhikkhave saddhivihå- 
rikemhi puttacittam upatthdpessati, ssddhivibaériko upajjbá- 
yamhi pitucittam upetthåpessati. evam te afifiamafifiam 
sagåravå sappatisså sabbågavuttino viharentå imasmim 
dhammavinaye vuddhim virü]him vepullam Apajjissanti. || 6 || 
етей ca pana bhikkhave upsjjhåyo gahetabbo: eksmsam 
uttaråsaigam karitvå påde vanditvå ukkutikam nisiditvà 
afijalim peggahetvå evam assa vacaniyo: upsjjhåyo me 
bhante hohi, upajjhayo me bbante hohi, upåjjbåyo me 
bbante hobiti. såhå 'ti vá, lahü ’ti vå, op&áyikan ti vå, 
petirüpen ti vå, påsådikens sampådehiti vå kåyens vifiüA- 
peti, våcåya vififidpeti, kåyene vücáys тійдареіі, gahito 
hoti прајјһёуо, na kåyens vififidpeti, na våcåye vififlå- 


46 MAHAVAGGA. (L 25. 7-11. 


peti, na kAyena våcåya vififldpeti, na gahito hoti upajjbA- 
уо. 1171 

saddhivih&rikena bhikkhave upajjháyamhi sammåvatti- 
tabbam, tatråyam sammåvattenå: kålass eva utthåye 
upåhanå omuficitvà ekamsam uttaråsafigam karitvà danta- 
kattham dåtabbam, mukhodskam databbam, åsanam раййА- 
petabbam. sace уйда hoti, bhájanam dhovitvå yågu upanå- 
metabbå. yågum pitassa udakam datvå bhüjenam patigga- 
hetvå nicam katvå sAdhukam sparighamsantena dhovitvá 
patisåmetabbam. ^ upajjháyambi vutthite &sanam uddhari- 
tabbam. sace во дево uklåpo hoti, so deso sammajjitabbo. || 8 || 
васе upajjhayo gåmam pavisitukAmo hoti, nivåsanam då- 
tabbam, pstinivåsanam patigguhetabbam, kåyabandhanam 
dåtabbam, ssgunam katvå samgbåtiyo dåtabbå, dhovitvå 
patto saudako dåtabbo. sace upsjjhåyo pacohåsamanam АКап- 
khati, timandalam paticohådentens parimandalam nivåsetvå 
kåyabandhanam beudbitvå sagupam katvå eamghåtiyo 
pårupitvå ganthikam patimufioitvå dhovitvà pattam gahetvå 
upajjbáyassa paochåsamanena hotabbam.  nátidüre ganta- 
bbam, na accásanne gantabbam. pattapariyApannam pa- 
tiggahetabbam. 191 na upejjháyassa bhanamánessa anta- 
rautarå katha opåtetabbå. upejjh&yo åpattisåmantå bhans- 
mno nivåretabbo. nivattantena pathamataram Agantvé 
@sanam paflfåpetabbam, pådodakam pådapttham pådaka- 
thalikam upauikkhipitebbam, paccuggantvå pattacivaram 
patiggahetabbam, petinivåsanam dåtabbam, nivåsanam pati- 
ggehetsbbam. ssce civaram sinnam hoti, muhuttam unhe 
otåpetabbam, na ca uphe ofvaram nidahitabbam. oiva- 
ram sambaritsbbam.  oiveram samharantens caturaiigulam 
`kannam useåretvå civaram samharitabbam må majjhe bhango 
&hoeiti. obhoge kåyabandhanam kåtabbam. васе pindapåto 
hoti upsjjhåyo ca bhufijitukamo hoti, udakam datvå pinda- 
påto upsnåmetabbo. [[10| upajjbåyo påniyena pucchitabbo. 
bhuttåvissa udakam datvå pattam patiggabetvå nicam katvå 
südhukam aparighamsantena dhovitvà vodakam katv& mu- 
huttam unhe otåpetabbo, na ca unhe patto nidshitabbo. 
pattacivaram nikkbipitabbem. pattam pnikkhipantena ekene 
hatthena pattam gabetvå ekena hatthena hetthåmaficam và 


T. 88, 11-16.) MAHÅVAGGA. 47 


bettbåpitbam vá peråmasitvå patto nikkhipitabbo, na ca 
anantarahitáya bhåmiyå patto nikkhipitabbo. сітвгат ni- 
kkhipantena ekene hatthena civaram gabetvå ekena hatthena 
civaravamsam vå civårarsjjum vá pamejjitvå pårato antam 
orato bhogam katvå civaram nikkhipitabbam. upajjháyamhi 
vutthite &sanam uddharitabbam, pådodakam pAdapitham på- 
dakathalikam petisámetabbam. sace so deso uklåpo hoti, so 
deso sammejjitabbo. ||1li| васе upajjbüyo nahåyitåkåmo 
hoti, nahánem patiyüdetabbam. sace sitene attho hoti, sitam 
petiyådetabbam. васе unhena attho hoti, upham patiyåde- 
tabbam. sace upejjháyo jentágharam pavisitukámo hoti, 
сопрат sannetabbam, тв КА temetabbå, jantågharapitham 
ådåya upajjhdyassa pitthito-pitthito gantvà jantågharapt- 
tham datvå civaram petiggahetvå ekamantam nikkhipi- 
tabbam, cunnam dåtabbam, mattikà dåtabbå. sace ussahati, 
jantågharam pevisitsbbam. jantågbaram pavisantena matti- 
kåya mukham makkhetvå purato са pacchato ca paticchå- 
detvå jantågheram pavisitabbam. |12|| na there bhikkhd 
anupakhajja nisiditabbam, na nevå bhikkhü Asanena pati- 
båhetabbå. jantåghare upajjhdyassa parikammam kåtabbam. 
jantågharå nikkhamantena jant&gharapitham ådåye purato 
ea pacchato ca petiocbådetvå jeutågberå nikkhamitabbam. 
udake pi upajjhåyassa parikammam kåtabbam. nashütena pa- 
thamataram uttaritvå attano gattam vodakam katvå nivåsetvå 
apejjhAyassa gattato udakam pamajjitabbam, nivåsanam då- 
tabbarn, samghåti dåtabbå, jantågharepitham Adaya petha- 
mataram ágantvà åsanam pefiflåpetabbam, pådodakam på- 
dapitham p&dakathalikam upenikkbipitabbem. upsjjhåyo 
pániyena pucchitabbo. |131 saoe uddis&petuk&mo hoti, 
uddisápetabbo. sace paripucohitukåmo hoti, paripucchi- 
tabbo. yasmim vihåre upejjbåyo viharati, sace so vihåro 
uklåpo hoti, sace ussahati, sodhetabbo. vihåram sodhentena 
pethamam pattacivaram nihantvå ekamantam nikkhipi- 
tabbam. nisidanepaccattharanam niharitvà ekamantam ni- 
kkhipitabbam. bhisibimbohanam niharitva ekamantam ni- 
kkhipitabbam. |141 mafico nicam katvå sådhukam apari- 
ghamsantens asamghattantens kavátapittham ntharitvá eka- 
mantam nikkhipitabbo. pitham nicam kaivá sådhukem 


48 MAHÁVAGGA. I. 85. 15-18. 


aparighamsantens asamghattantena kavátapittham niharitvá 
ekamantam nikkhipitabbam. maficapatipadakA niharitvå 
ekamantam nikkhipitsbbå. khelamallako niharitvå ekam- 
entam nikkhipitabbo.  epassenaphalakam niharitvå ekam- 
antam nikkhipitabbam. bhummattharanam yathApaiifia- 
ttam sallakkhetvå niharitvå ekamantam nikkhipitabbam. 
sace vihåre santánakam hoti, ullokå pathamam ohåretabbam. 
Alokasandhikannabhågå pamaejjitabbá. sace gerukaparikam- 
makatå bhitti kappakit& hoti, colakam temetvå pijetvå pa- 
majjitsbbå. aaco kAjavannaketé bhümi kappakitA hoti, 
cojakam temetvå piletvé pamajjitabb& sace akatå hoti 
bhûmi, udakena parippositvå eammajjitabbé må vihåro rajena 
Üübeüfüiti samköram vicinitvå ekamantam chaddetabbam. 
115] bhammattharanam otåpetvå sodhetvå pappothetvå ati- 
haritvå yathåpafifiattam pafifidpetabbam.  maficapatipåda- 
kA otåpetvå pamsjjitvå atibaritvå yetbåttbåne tlapetabbå. 
mafico otåpetvå sodhetvå pappothetvå nicam katvå sådhukam 
aparighamsantene asamghattantena kavåtapittham atiharitva 
yathapafifiattam pafiflápetabbo. pitham otåpetvå sodhetvå 
peppothetvà ntcam Кабуд sádhakam aperighamsantena asam- 
ghattantena kavátapittham atiharitvå yathåpafifiattam раййА- 
petabbam. bhisibimbohanam otåpetvå sodhetvå pappothetvå 
stihøritvå yathdpefifiattam pefifiåpetabbam. nisidanapaoca- 
ttharapam otåpetvå sodhetvå pappothetvå atiharitvå yathå- 
pafliiattam paüfi&petsbbem. khejamallako otåpetvå pemajji- 
två atibaritvà yathåtthåne thapetabbo. apassenaphalakam 
otåpetvå pamajjitva atiharitvå yathåtthåne thapetabbam. i16 || 
pattacivaram nikkhipitabbam. pattam nikkhipantena ekena 
hatthena pattam gahetvå екепа hatthena hetth4maficam và 
hettbåpitham vå peråmasitvå patto nikkhipitabbo, ne ca 
anantarabitåya bbåmiyå patto nikkhipitabbo. otvaram ni- 
kkhipantena ekens hetthens otvaram gabetvå ekena hatthena 
civaravamsam và civararajjam vå pamajjitvà pårsto antam 
orato bhogam katvå ctvaram nikkhipitabbam. ||7|| sace 
puratthimå sarajå våtå vAyanti, puratthimA våtapånå thake- 
tabbå. sace pacchimá earajå våtå våyanti, psochimå våtapånå 
tbaketabbå. sace uttarå sarajá våtå våyenti, uttarå våtapånå 
thaketabbå. sace dakkhinå sarajà våtå våyanti, dakkhinå vå- 


L 5. 18-23. MAHÅVAGGA. 49 


tapånå thaketabbá. васе sitakålo hoti, divå vAtapana vivari- 
tabbå, rattim thaketabbá. васе unhakålo hoti, divå våtapånå 
thaketabba, rattim vivaritabba. [1181 sace parivenam uklå- 
pam hoti, parivepam sammsjjitsbbam. васе kotthako uklåpo 
hoti, kotthako sammajjitabbo. васе upattbånasålå uklàpà 
hoti, upatthánasálà sammejjitabbà. sace aggisålå uklåpå 
hoti, aggisàlá sammejjitabbå. sace vaccakuti uklåpå hoti, 
vaccakuti sammajjitebbå. васе pániyam na hoti, påniyam 
upatthåpetabbam. sace paribhojaniyam na hoti, paribhoja- 
niyam upetthåpetabbam. васе dcamanakumbhiyé udakam 
na hoti, åcsmanakumbhiyé udakam asificitabbam. ||19!! sace 
upajjháyessa anabbirati uppannå hoti, saddhivihárikena vå- 
pakåsetabbå vipakåsåpetabbå dbammakathå våssa kátabbá. 
sace upajjhávasss kukkuccam uppannam hoti, saddhivibåri- 
kena vinodetabbam vinodipetabbam dhammekatbå våssa 
kåtabbå. васе upsjjbåyasss ditthigatam uppannam hoti, 
saddhivibårikena vivecetabbam vivecåpetabbam dhammaka- 
tha våssa kàtabbá. [|20] васе upajjháyo garudbammam 
sjjhápanno hoti parivåsåraho, saddhivihårikena ussukkam 
kåtabbam kin ti nu kho ssmgho upsjjhåyassa parivüsam 
dadeyyå "ti. sace upajjbéyo målåya patikassanårabo hoti, 
saddhivihárikena ussukkam kåtabbam kin ti nu kho samgho 
upejjbåyam målåys patikesseyyå 'ti. васе upajjbáyo må- 
nattáraho hoti, saddhivibårikena ussukkam kåtabbam kin ti 
nu kho samgho upsjjhåyasss månattam dadeyyå 'ti. васе 
upajjbayo nbbbånårebo hoti, saddhivihárikena ussukkem kå- 
tabbam kin ti nu kho samgho upajjbayam abbheyyá ’ti. |12111 
sace samgho upajjbüyasss kammam kattukåmo hoti tajjani- 
yam và nisssyam vå pabbåjaniyam vá patisåreniyam vå 
ukkhepaniyam vå, eaddhivihárikena ussukkam kátebbam kin 
ti nu kho samgho upajjhdyassa kammam na kareyya lahu- 
kya va рагізётеууё "ti. katam và pan’ assa hoti aamghena 
kemwam tajjaniyam vå niesayam và pabbájaniyem vå pati- 
såraniyam vå ukkhepaniyam va, saddhivihárikena ussukkam 
kåtabbam kin ti nu kho upajjbáyo sammavatteyya lomam 
påteyya netthárem vatteyya, samgho tam kammem pati- 
ppassambheyyá "ti. |22|| sace upajjbüyassa civaram dhovi- 
tabbam hoti, saddhivihárikens dhovitabbam ussukkam vá 


YOL. ш. 4 


50 MAHÅVAGGA. (I. 96. 23-96. 1. 


kAtabbam kin ti nu kho upsjjhåyasss civaram dhoviyeth& 
"ti. saoo upajjháysssa civaram kátabbam hoti, saddhivib&- 
rikena kåtabbam ussukkem vA katabbam kin ti nu kho 
upajjháyassa civaram kariyethá 'ti. sace upajjhåyassa raja- 
nam pacitabbam hoti, saddhivihürikeng pacitabbam ussukkam 
và kåtabbam kin ti nu kho upajjháyassa rajenam paciyethd 
‘ti, sace upajjhdyassa civaram rajitabbam hoti, saddhivib&- 
rikena rajitabbam ussukkam vå kåtabbam kin ti nu kho 
upsjjbåyassa civarem rajiyethà "ti. civaram rajantene så- 
dhukam samperivattakam-samparivattakam rajitabbam na ca 
acchinne theve pekkemitabbam. (|23|| ne upsjjháyam ap&- 
pucohá ekaccassa patto dåtabbo, na ekaccassa patto patigga- 
hetabbo, na ekaccassa civaram dåtabbam, па ekaccassa civa- 
ram patiggahetabbam, no ekaccasaa parikkhåro dåtabbo, na 
ekaccassa parikkbáro patiggahetabbo, na ekaccassa keså che- 
dåtabbå, na ekaccena keså chedåpetabbå, na ekaccassa pari- 
kemmam kåtabbam, na ekaccena parikammam kåråpetabbam, 
na ekaccassa veyyüvacco kåtabbo, ne ekaccena veyyüvacco 
kâråpetabbo, na ekaccassa pacohåsamanens hotabbam, na 
ekacco pacchüsamano ådåtabbo, na ekaccassa pindapáto ni- 
haritabbo, na ekaccena pindapåto nibaråpetabbo. na upa- 
jjbåyam anápucchà gámo pavisitabbo, na susånam gauta- 
bbam, na diså pekkomitabbå. васе upajjhayo gilåno hoti, 
y4vajivam upatthátabbo, vutthánassa Agametabban ti. |[24 || 
'upsjjháyevattam nitthitam. 11261 


upajjháyena bhikkhave saddhivihárikambhi sammávatti- 
tabbam, tatráyam sammávattaná: upsjjbåyena bhikkhave 
saddhiviháriko samgahetabbo anuggahetabbo uddesena pari- 
pucchüya ovådens anusåsaniyå. sace upsjjhåyassa patto hoti, 
saddhivibårikasss patto na hoti, upajjháyena aaddbivibåri- 
kassa patto dåtabbo ussukkam và kAtabbam kin ti nu kho 
saddhivihárikassa patto uppejjiyethà "ti. васе upaejjh&yassa 
civaram hoti, saddhivihárikassa civaram na hoti, upajjhå- 
yena saddhivihérikassa civaram dátabbem  ussukkam va 
kåtabbam kin ti nu kho seddhivihdrikessa civaram uppajji- 
yethå 'ti. sace upsjjhdyasas parikkhéro hoti, eaddhivihåri- 
kassa perikkháro na hoti, upajjbáyena saddhivihårikesss 


I. 38. 1-5.) MAHÁYAOGA. bl 


parikkhåro dátabbo ussukkam vå kåtabbam kin ti nu kho 
saddhivihürikassa parikkhéro uppejjiyethá ’ti, 111 sace 
saddhiviháriko giláno hoti, kêlas’ eva uttháya dantakattham 
d&tabbam, mukhodakam dåtebbam, &ásanarn pafifiApetabbam. 
sace уйда hoti, bhájanam dhovitva уйди upanåmetabbå. 
yågum pitassa udakam datvå bhájanam patiggshetvå nicam 
katvà sådhukam  aperighamsantena dhovitvå patisåme- 
tabbam. saddhivibårikamhi vutthite Asanam uddharitabbam. 
sace so deso uklåpo hoti, so deso eammajjitabbo. ||2]| васе 
saddhivibåriko gåmam  pavisitukámo hoti, nivásanam då- 
tabbam, patinivdsanam patiggahetabbam, káyabandhanam 
dåtabbam, sagunam katvå eamghåtiyo dåtabbå, dhovitvå 
petto saudako databbo. ettåvatå nivattissatiti &aanam раййа- 
petabbam, pådodakam pådapitham pAdakathalikam upani- 
kkbipitebbam, paccuggantvå pattacivaram patiggahetabbam, 
patinivåsanam dåtabbam, nivåsanam patiggahetabbam. sace 
civaram sinnam boti, muhuttam unhe otápetabbam, na ca 
unhe civaram nidahitabbam. civaram samharitabbam. civa- 
ram sambarautena caturangulam kannam ussåretvå civaram 
samharitabbam må majjhe bhango ahositi. obhoge káya- 
bendhanam kåtabbam. sace pindapáto hoti saddhivihåriko 
ca bhufljitukåmo hoti, udakam datvå pipdapåto upandme- 
tabbo. 11311 saddbivibårike paniyena pucchitebbo. bhuttå- 
vissa udakam datvå pattam patiggahetvå nicam katvå sådhu- 
kam aperighamsantena dhovitvå vodakam katvå muhuttam 
unhe otápetabbo, na са unhe patto nidohitabbo. pattaciva- 
ram nikkhipitabbam. pattam nikkbipantena ekena hatthepa 
pattam gahetvå ekena hatthena hetthàmaficam vå hetthå- 
pitham và paråmasitvå patto nikkhipitabbo, ne ca snanta- 
rahitåya bbiimiyå patto nikkhipitabbo. civaram nikkhi- 
pantena ekena hatthena civaram gahetvå ekena hatthena 
civaravamsam vá civararsjjum vå pamsjjitvå párato antam 
orato bhogam katvå civaram nikkhipitabbam. saddhiviba- 
rikamhi vutthite &ssnam uddharitabbam, pádodekam påda- 
pitham pádakathalikarn patis&metabbam. васе во deso uklåpo 
hoti, so deso sammajjitabbo. 141 sace saddhiviháriko nahå- 
yitukåmo hoti, nahánam petiyüdetabbam. васе sitena attho 
hoti, sitam patiy&detabbam. васе unhena attho hoti, unham 


82 MAHAVAGGA. [1. 88. 5-9. 


patiyådetabbam. евое saddhivibåriko jentågharam pavisitu- 
Като hoti, cunnam sannetabbam, mattikå temetabbå, jantå- 
ghbarapitban ådåye gantvá jantágharapitham detvå ciraram 
patiggahetva okamantam nikkhipitabbam, cunpam dåtabbam, 
mattika dåtabbå. васе ussahati, jantågberam pavisitabbam. 
jantágharam pavissutens mattikdya mukbem mekkhetvå 
purato ca pacchato ca paticchådetvå jantågharam pavisi- 
tabbam. |151 na there bbikkhå anupakhajja nisiditabbam, 
na navå bhikkhå åsanena patibåhetabbå. jantåghare saddhi- 
vihárikassa parikammam kåtabbam. jantågharå nikkhe- 
mantena jentågbarapitbem Adaya purato ca pacchato ca 
paticchådetvå jantågharå nikkhamitabbam. udake pi saddhi- 
vihårikasss parikammam kåtabbam. nabátena pathamatarum 
utteritvå attano gattam vodakem katvå nivåsetvå saddhivi- 
hárikessa gattato udakam pamajjitabbam, nivásanam dàta- 
bbam, samghåti dåtabbå, jantagharapitham &dáya pathama- 
tarum ágantvá Ёвапаш pafifiåpetabbam, pådodskam padapt- 
tham pådaketbelikem upanikkhipitabbam. saddhivibériko 
påniyens pucchitabbo. 1161 yasmim viháre saddhivibåriko 
vibarati, auce so vibåro uklåpo hoti, sace ussahati, sodhe- 
tabbo. vibüram sodhentena pathamam pattacivaram niha- 
ritvå ekamantam nikkhipitabbam ... (=I. 26, 14-19)... 
sace ácamanekumbbiyà udskam ns hoti, åcamanakumbhiyå 
udakam åsificitabbam. |17 1 sace saddhivibårikassa anabhi- 
rati uppennå- hoti, upsjjháyena våpakåsetabbå vüpekás&pe- 
tabbå dhammakathå våssa kåtabbå. sace saddhivihårikasse 
kukkuccam uppannam hoti, upajjbåyene vinodetabbam vino- 
dåpetabbam dhbammakathå våssa kåtabbå. васе saddhivihå- 
rikasss ditthigatam uppannam hoti, upajjhàyena vivece- 
tabbam vivecåpetabbam dbemmakathé vassa kåtabbå [8] 
sace saddbivihåriko garudhammam ujjbåpanno hoti parivåså- 
raho, upajjhüyona ussukkem kAtabbam kin ti nu kho samgho 
saddbivihårikassa parivåsam dadeyyå "ti. sace saddhivihå- 
riko müláya patikessandraho hoti, upsjjbåyena ussukkam 
kåtabbam kin ti nu kho samgho saddhivihårikam målåys 
patikesseyyé ‘ti. sace saddhivibåriko månatiåralo hoti, 
upajjhayena uesukkem kátabbam kin ti nu kho samgho 
saddhivihárikassa mánattam dadeyyå 'ti. sace saddhivihå- 


I. 9. 9-37. 1] MAHÅVAGGA. 53 


riko sbbbånåraho hoti, upsjjhåyens ussukkam kAtabbam 
kin ti nu kho samgho saddhivihárikam abbheyyá ’ti. ||9 |J 
sace samgho saddhivibérikassa kammem kattukåmo hoti 
tajjaniyam vå nissayam và pabbåjaniyam vñ patisdraniyam 
và ukkhepaniyam vá, upajjháyena ussukkam kåtabbam kin 
ti nu kho samgho saddhivihårikesss kammam ne kareyya 
lahuk&ya và parinåmeyyå ‘ti. katam và pan’ assa hoti 
samghena kammam tajjeniyam và nissayam vå pabbåjaniyam 
và patisárapiyam và ukkhepaniyam va, upsjjb&yena ussu- 
kkam kátabbam kin ti nu kho saddhivihåriko sammávatteyya 
юшат páteyya nettbåram vatteyya, samgho tam kemmam 
patippassambheyyå "ti. ||10|| васе saddhivihárikassa civaram. 
dhovitabbam hoti, upajjhdyena åcikkbitabbam evam dho- 
veyy siti, ussukkam và kåtabbam kin ti nu kho saddhivihå- 
rikassa civaram dhoviyethå ‘ti. васе saddhivibdrikassa 
civaram kåtsbbam hoti, upajjháyena åcikkhitabbam evam 
kareyyåstti, ussukkom và kåtabbam kin ti nu kho saddbivi- 
hårikesa civaram kariyethå 'ti. васе saddbivihårikasse 
rajanam pacitabbam hoti, upajjbåyena acikkhitabbam eram 
paceyyåsiti, ussukkarn và kåtabbam kin ti nu kho saddhivi- 
bårikassa rajanam  paciyethü 'ti. sace saddhivihårikasse 
eiveram rajitabbam hoti, upajjbàyena &cikkhitebbam evum 
rajeyyåsiti, ussukkom vå kátabbarn kin ti nu kho saddhivi- 
bårikassa civaram rajiyethå "ti. civaram rejantena sádhukam 
samparivattakam-eamperivattakem rajitabbam na ca acchi- 
nne (ћете pakkamitabbam. васе eaddbiviháriko gilåno hoti, 
yåvajivam upatthátabbo, vutthánassa ágametabban ti. |111 
saddhivihárikavattam nitthitem. 13611 


tena kho pana samayena saddhivihårikå upajjhåyesu na 
sammåvattanti. ye te bhikkhü appicchå, te ujjháyanti kht- 
yanti vipåcenti: kathem bi name saddbivibårikå upajjhüyesu 
na sammåvattissantiti. atha kho te bhikkhû bhagavato etam 
attham árocesum. saccam kira bhikkhave saddhivihüriká 
upsjjbåyesu na sammávattantiti. saccam bbagavå. viga- 
rahi buddho bhagavå: katham hi nåme bhikkhave saddhi- 
vihårikå upajjbáyesu na sammåvettissantiti. —vigarabitvå 
dhammikatham hatvå bbikkhü Amantesi: na bhikkhave 


54 MAHÁVAGGA. (I. 97. 1-7, 


saddhivibårikena upsjjhåyambi na sammåvattitabbam. уо 
na sammåvatteyya, Apatti dukkatassA "ti. l|| n’ eva sammå- 
vattanti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujdndmi 
bhikkhave asammåvattantam panåmetum. evañ ca pana 
bhikkhave pepåmetabbo: panámemi tan ti vá, må yidha 
patikkamtti và, nihara te patteciveren ti vå, ndham ta- 
ya upetthütabbo ‘ti và káyena viññápeti, våcåya viüilA- 
peti, kåyena våcåys vifliiåpeti, panåmito hoti saddhivihå- 
riko. na kAyena vififlåpeti, na vácüya vififlåpeti, na kåyena 
våcåya vififidpeti, na papAmito hoti saddhivibüriko 'ti. |1211 
tena kho pana eamayena saddhiviháriká panåmitå ne kha- 
måpenti. bhagavato etam attham frocesum. enujånåmi 
bhikkhave khamfpetun ti. п’ eva khamápenti. bhaga- 
vato etam attham årocesum. na bhikkhave panåmitene 
na khamápetabbo. yo na khamfpeyys, Apatti dukkstasså 
'ti. [180 tena kho pana samayens upajjháy& khamápi- 
yamånå na khamanü. bbagavato etam attham Årocesum. 
anujånåmi bhikkheve khamitun ti. n'eva khamanti. saddbi- 
vihårikå pakkamanti pi, vibbhamanti pi, titthiyesu pi samka- 
manti. bhagavato etam attham frocesum. na bhikkhave 
khamåpiyamånena na khamitabbam. yo na kbameyys, åpetti - 
dukkatasaé ”ti. ||4|| tena kho рапа samayene upejjhåyå ea- 
mmåvettantam panAmenti, asammávattantar ps papAmenti. 
bhagavato etam attham årocesum. na bhikkhave sammå- 
vattanto panåmetabbo. yo panümeyya, åpatti dukkatamsa пе 
ca bhikkhave asammåvattanto na panåmetabbo. yo na paná- 
meyye, åpatti dukketassa. |1511 paficabi bhikkhave afgebi 
samannågato ssddbivihåriko papåmetabbo: upajjhiyamhi 
nådbimattam решат hoti, nådhimatto pasådo hoti, nådhi- 
mattå hiri hoti, nådbimatto рёгвто hoti, nådhimattå bhå- 
vanå hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave paficab' angehi samannå- 
gato saddhiviháriko panåmetabbo. райсам bbikkhave 
afigebi samannágato saddbivihåriko na panåmetabbo: upa- 
jjbayamhi adbimattam pemam hoti, adhimatto pasado hoti, 
adhimatta hirf hoti, adhimatto gåravo hoti, adbimattå bháva- 
nå hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave paficah' angehi samanndgato 
saddhivihåriko na panámetabbo. ||6|| райсаһі bhikkhave 
afigebi samannågato saddhivihåriko alam panåmetum: upa- 


I. 91. 7-88 2.) MAHÅVAGGA. 55 


jjhàysmhi nàdhimattam pemam hoti . . . nddhimattd bhå- 
vanå hoti. imebi kho bhikkhave paficah' angehi samannå- 
gato saddhivihåriko alam panåmetum. paiicahi bhikkhave 
angehi samannágato saddhivihåriko n&lam pap&ámetum: upa- 
jjh4yamhi adhimattam pemam hoti . . . adhimattå bhávan& 
hoti. imebi kho bhikkhave puficah’ angehi samannågato 
saddhivihåriko nülam penåmetum. |7|| paicahi bhikkhave 
aügehi eamanndgatam saddhivibárikam apandmento upajjha- 
yo eåtisåro hoti, papåmento anatisåro hoti: upsjjhåyamhi 
nüdbimattam pemam hoti . . . vådbimattå bbåvanå hoti. 
imehi kho bhikkhave райсаћ’ angehi samannågatam saddhi- 
vihårikam apanåmento upsjjhåyo eåtisåro hoti, panåmento 
anatisåro hoti. райсаһі bhikkbave angehi ssmannågatam 
saddhivibårikam pandmento upajjháyo såtisåro hoti, apanå- 
mento anatisåro hoti: upajjhåyembi adhimettam pemam 
hoti . . . adhimattà bhåvanå hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave 
райсаћ’ angehi samannågstam saddhivihårikam panimento 
upajjbåyo såtisåro hoti, apap&mento anatisáro botiti. || 8 || 27 | 


tena kho pana ватауепа aññataro bråhmano bhikkhå 
upasamkamitvå pabbajjam yåci, tam bhikkhf na icchimsu 
pabbåjetum, so bhikkhüsu pabbajjam alabhamano kiso ahosi 
]ükho dubbanno uppanduppandukajåto dhamsnisanthatagatto. 
айдала kho bhagavå tam bráhmapam kisam lükham du- 
bbannam uppenduppendukajütam dhemenisanthatagattam, 
disvåna bbikkhü ámantesi: kim nu kho so bhikkhave bråh- 
mano kiso lükho dubbapgo uppanduppandukajåto dbamani- 
santhatagatto 'ti. ево bhante bráhmano bhikkhü upasamka- 
mitvå pabbajjam yáci, tam bhikkhü na icchimeu pabbájetum, 
so bhikkhüsu pabbajjam alabhaméno kiso lükho dubbenno 
uppanduppandukejáto dhamanieanthatagatto 'ti. |l] айа 
kho bhegavá bhikkhü åmentesi: ko nu kho bhikkhave tassa 
br&áhmanasea adhikáram saratiti. evam vutte åyasmå Såri- 
putto bhagavantam etad avoca: aham kho bhante tassa 
bråhmanassa adhikåram saråmiti. kim pana tvam Såriputta 
tassa bråhmsnesss adhikáram sarasiti. idha me bhante so 
bråhmano Råjagahe pindåya сагапіата katacchubhi- 
kkham dåpesi, imam kho aham bbante tassa bråhmanassa 


56 MAIAVAGGA. (L. 89. 2-39. 1 


adhikåram saråmiti. ||2|| sádhu e&dhu Sáriputta, katafifluno hi 
Sáriputte sappurisá katavedino. tena hi tvam Såriputta tam 
brahmanam pabbájehi upasampådebiti. katháham bbante 
tam bråhmanam pabbåjemi upasampådemiti. atha kbo bha- 
-gavå etasmim pakarane dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü 
Amantesi: yà så bhikkhave mayé tihi saranagamanehi upa- 
sampadå anuññátà, tåbam ajjatagge patikkhipåmi. anujánà- 
mi bbikkhave flatticatutthena kammena upassmpå- 
detum. ||3l| evañ ca pana bhikkhave upasampádetabbo : 
vyattena bhikkhun& patibalena samgho fiápetabbo: sunåtu 
me bhante samgho. ayam itthannåmo itthannåmassa åyas- 
mato upasampadåpekkho. yadi samghassa pattakallam, 
samgho ittbennåmam upassmpådeyya itthannåmena upajjhå- 
yena. езй ñatti. 1141 supåtu me bhante samgho. ayam 
itthannåmo itthannåémassa Åyasmato upasampadápekkho. 
samgho itthannámam upasampádeti itthannåmene upajjhá- 
yena.  yassáyasmato khamati itthannåmasss upasampadå 
itthånnåmens upsjjhåyena, so tunh’ assa, yaesa па kkbamati, 
so bhüseyya. dutiyam pi etam attham vadåmi: sunátu me 
bhante samgho. syam itthennåmo itthann&maesa dyasmato 
upasampadápekkho.  samgho itthannimam  upasampádeti 
itthannåmena upajjhüyena. yassåyasmato kbamati itthan- 
nümassa upasampadá ittbannåmene upsjjbåyeua, so tupb' 
assa, yassa na kkhamati, so bháseyya. ||5 1 tatiyam pi etam 
attham vadámi: eunåtu me bhante eamgho. ayam itthann&- 
mo itthannåmassa áyasmato upasampadápekkho. samgho 
itthannámam upasampådeti itthennåmena upajjháyenas. yas- 
sÅyasmato khamati itthannámassa upasampada itthanndmena 
upajjháyena, eo tunh' assa, yassa na kkhamati, so bhåseyye. 
upasampanno eamghena itthannémo ittbannåmena upajjhá- 
yena. kbamati samghassa, tasmå tunhi, evam etam dbåra- 
yåmiti. 161281 


tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu upasampanna- 
samenantarå anácáram ácarati. bhikkhå evam åhamsu : må 
åvuso evarüpam akási, п’ etam kappatiti. so evam dha: n’ 
evåham åyasmante yåcim upasampådetha man ti, kisaa mam 
tumhe ayåcitå upasampåditthå 'ti. bhagavato etam attham 


1.99. 1-30. 2.) MAHÁVAOGA. 57 


årocesum. па bhikkhave ayAcitens upasampådetsbbo. уо 
upasampådeyya, åpatti dukkatassa, anujånåmi bhikkhave 
yåcitena upasampådetum. ||I|| evañ ca pana bhikkhave 
yacitabbo. tena upasampedápekkhena samgham upasamka- 
mitvå ekamsam uttaråsafigam karitvå bhikkhQnam раде 
vanditvå ukkutikam nisiditvá aüjalim paggabetvå evam assa 
vacaniyo: samgham bhante upasampadam yåcåmi, ullumpa- 
tu mam bhante samgho anukampam upådåye, dutiyam pi 
yacitabbo — la — tatiyam pi yåcitabbo — la —. 1211 vyatte- 
na bhikkhunå patibalena samgho fiåpetabbo: sunåtu me bhante 
samgho. вуеш itthannåmo itthannámaesa åyasmato upa- 
sampadåpekkho. itthannimo samgham upasampadam yåcati 
itthannåmena upajjbåyena. yadi samghassa pattakallam, 
eamgho itthannüámam upasampádey ya itthanndmena upajjbå- 
yena. eå fiatti. 131 evpåtu me bhante samgho. ayam 
itthannåmo itthannåmasss Ayasmato upasampadåpekkho. 
itthannåmo samgbom upasampadam yåcati itthanndmena 
upajjháyena. samgho itthanndmam upasampådeti itthannå- 
mena upsjjbåyena. yassdyasmato khemati itthanndmassa 
upasampadá itthannámena upajjháyena, so tanh’ assa, yassa 
na kkhamati, so bháseyya. dutiyam pi etam attham vadåmi 
— la — tatiyem pi etam attham vadåmi — la —. upasam- 
panno samghena itthannámo itthannåmena upajjbåyene. 
khamati samghassa, tasmå tuphi, evam etam dhbårayå- 
miti. 141291 


tena kho pana samayena Råjagehe panitinam bhattá- 
nam bhattapatipåti adhitthitá hoti. atha kho aüfiatarasea 
brabmanassa etad ehosi: ime kho samané Sakyaputtiyå su- 
khasilà sukbasamåcårå, subbojanåni bhufijitva nivåtesu sa- 
yenesu sayanti. yam nünüham samanesu Sakyaputtiyeeu 
pabbajeyyan ti. atha kho so bráhmego bhikkhü upa- 
samkamitvà pabbajjam yåci, tam bhikkhüà pabbájesum upa- 
sampádesum. ||1 || tasmim pabbajite bhattapatipáti khiyitthe. 
bhikkhå evam åbamsu: ehi dáni Avuso pindåye carissåmå 
‘ti, во evam åha: nåham åvuso etamkáraná pabbajito pindá- 
ya carissåmiti, sace me dessatbe bhufljissåmi, по ce me dama- 
tha vibbhamissdmiti. kim pana tvam åvuso uderassa kåranå 


58 MAHÁVAGGA. (1. 90. 2-81. 2. 


pabbejito Чі. evam &vuso'ti. |2|| уе te bhikkhü appiccbá, 
te ujjhåyanti khiyanti vip&centi: katham hi ndma bhikkhu 
evam svåkkhåte dhammavinaye udarasea kåranå pabbajissa- 
titi. te bhikkhà bhagavato etam attbam årocesum. васса 
kira tvam bbikkbu udaressa kárená pabbajito 'ti. saccam 
bhagevå. vigarabi buddho bhagavü. katham hi nàms tvam 
moghapurisa evam svåkkhåte dhammavinaye udarassa kê- 
rand pabbajissasi. n’ etam moghapurisa appasannánam 
và pesådåye pesaennánam và bbiyyobbåvåye. vigarabitvå 
dhammikatham katvå bkikkht åmantesi: 131 enujånåmi 
bhikkhave upasampådentena cattåro nissaye &cikkhitum : 
pindiyålopabhojanam nissåye pabbajjá, tattha te yåva- 
' тата ussåho karapiyo. atirekalåbho samghabhattam uddesa- 
bhattam nimantanam salåkabbettam pakkhikam uposathikam 
patipadikam. pemsukülacivaram nissáya pabbejjå, ta- 
ttha te yávajivam ussåho karaniyo.  atirekalábho khomam 
kappasikam koseyyam kembelam sinam bhengam. ruk- 
khemülasen&ásanam pissåya pabbajjå, tattha te yavajivam 
ussåho karapiyo.  atirekalábho vibåro addhayogo påsådo 
‘hammiyam gubå. pütimuttabhesajjam nissdya pabbajjá, 
tattha te yAvajivam ussåho karapiyo.  atirekalàbho sappi 
navanitam telam madhu phånitan ti. |4]90|| upajjhåye- 
vattabhånavårem nitthitam peficamam. 


tena kho pana samayena afiflatsro mánavako bbikkhå upe- 
samkamitvå pabbajjam yåci. tassa bhikkhü patigace’ eva 
nissaye ücikkhimsu. во evam dha: васе me bbante pabbajite 
nissaye åcikkheyyåtha abhirameyyam sv åham, na dao’ åham 
bbante pabbajissámi, jegucchå me nissayå potik0lå "ti. bhi- 
kkhü bhagavato etam attham åroceum. па bhikkhave 
patigaco’ eva nissay& åcikkbitabbå. yo Acikkheyya, å- 
patti dukkestassa. anuján&mi bhikkhave upasampannasam- 
&nantará nissaye Acikkhitun ti. | l| tena kho pana 
samayena bhikkhü duvaggena pi tivaggena pi ganena upa- 
sampådenti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. na bhi- 
kkbave ünadassvaggena ganena upasampádetabbo. уо 
upasampådeyye, åpetti dukkatasss, anujdndmi bhikkhave 
dasavaggena vå atirekadasavaggena và ganena upesampé- 


L 31. 2-6] MAHÁVAGOA. 59 


detun ti. |2|| tena kho pena samayena bhikkbü eka- 
vassåpi davassipi saddhivih&rikam upasampádenti Ayas- 
mápi Upaseno Vangantaputto ekavasso saddhivi- 
hårikam upesampádesi. so vassam vuttho duvasso ekavas- 
sam saddhivihárikam ådåya yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå bhegevantam abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi. 

Ácinnam kho pan’ etam buddbånam bhagavantånam ågantu- 
kehi bhikkhühi saddhim patisammoditum. |3|| atha kho. 
bhagevå dyasmantam Upasenam Vaengantaputtam etad avo- 
oa: kacci bhikkhu khameniyam, kaoci yåpaniyam, kacci 
'tthe sppakilamstbena addhünam ågatå 'ti. khamaniyam 
bhagavà, yåpaniyam  bhagavá, appekilamathena mayam 
bhante addhánam ågatå "ti. jånentåpi tathågatå puochenti, 
jånantåpi ne pucchanti, kålam viditvå pucchanti, kålam vi- 
ditvå na pucchanti, atthasamhitam tathågatå pucchanti no 
anatthosamhitam, anatthasamhite setughåto tathágatánam. 
dvihi àkürehi buddbå bhagavanto bhikkhü patipucchanti, 
dhammam vå desessåma, eåvekånam vå sikkhåpadam раййй- 

pessåmå "d. 141 atha kho bhagavå åyasmantam Upasenam 
Vaiigantaputtam etad avoca: kativasso 'si tram bhikkh "ti. 
duvasso "ham bhagavå 'ti. ayam pana bhikkhu kativasso 'ti. 
ekavasso bhagavå "і. kim t àyam bhikkhu hotiti. ssddhi- 
vihåriko me bhagsvá 'ti. vigarahi buddho bhagevå: an- 
anucchaviyam moghapurisa ananulomikam appatirüparn asså- 
manskam akeppiyam aksrapiyam. katham hi пАшв ётер 
moghapurisa aflilehi ovadiyo anusåsiyo aññam ovaditum anu- 
süsitum maññissasi. atilahum kho {уаш moghapuriaa bå- 
hullåya &vatto yad idam gsnabandhikam. n’ etam mogha- 
purise appasannánam vá pasådåye pasannànam vá bhiyyo- 
bbåvåyå "ti.  vigarahitvà dhammiketham ketvå bhikkhü 
åmantesi: na bhikkhave ünadaesavassena upasampådetabbo. 
yo upasampådeyya, åpatti dukkatassa. auuján&mi bhikkhava 
desavassena үй atirekadasavassena vA upasampå- 
detan ti. |161! tena kho pans samayena bbikkhå dasavoss’ 
amba dasavass' amhá ’ti bala avyattå upasampüdenti, dissanti 
upsjjbåyå bala, eaddbivihériké pandita, dissanti upajjhayé 
avyattd, eaddhiviharikA vyattå, dissanti upajjháy& appassutå, 
saddbivihårikå bahuseut&, disssnti upajjháyá duppefiflå, sa- 


60 MAHÄVAGGA. (I. 91. 6-88. 2. 


ddhivihárikà pafifiavanto, afifistaro pi aiiatitthiyepubbo 
upajjháyena sahadhammikam vuccamåno upajjhåyessa vå- 
dam åropetvå tam yeva titthåyatanam samkami. |16] уе te 
bbikkhå appiochå, te ujjhåyanti khiyanti vipåcenti : katham 
hi nama bhikkhf dasavass' amhá dasavass' amhá "ti bålå avya- 
tt upasampådessanti, dissanti upajjhåyå bala . . . saddhivihå- 
rikA pafifiavanto "ti. atha kho te bhikkhü bhagavato etam 
&ttham árocesum. saccam kira bhikkhave bhikkhü dasavasa' 
amhå dasavass' ambå "ti bålå avyattå upasampådenti, dissanti 
upajjbåyå bala . . . saddbivibårikå paññavanto "ti. saccam 
bhagavå. ||7| vigarahi buddho bhagavé. Каат bi nåma 
te bhikkhave moghapuriså dasavass’ amhá dasavass’ amhé 'ti 
ЪАА avyattå upasampådessanti, dissanti upajjháy& bålå . . . 
saddhiviháriká paññavanto. n’ etam bhikkhave appasannå- 
nam v4 pasådåya — la —, vigarabitvå dhammikatham katvå 
bhikkh( &mantesi: na bhikkhave bålona avyattena upa- 
sampådetabbo. yo upasampådeyya, åpatti dukkatassa. 
anujånåmi bbikkhave vyattena bhikkhuná patibalena dasa- 
vaseena và atirekadasavassena vá upasampådetun 
ti. 181311 


tena kho pana samayena bhikkhü upajjháàyesu pakkentesu 
pi vibbhamantesa pi kålamkatesu pi pakkhasamkanteeu pi 
anåcariyakå anovadiyamán& ananuefsiyamånå dunnivatth& 
duppårutå an&keppasampanná pindaya caranti, manussinam 
bhuüjamán&nam . . . (= I. 26. 1-4) . . . saccam bhagavå. 
vigarehitvå dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü åmantesi: anu- 
ján&mi bhikkhave Acariyam.  &cariyo bhikkhave antevåsi- 
Каші puttacittam upatthüpessati, antevåsiko åcariyamhi 
pituoittam upatthåpessati. evam te аййашаййаш sagåravå 
sappatisså sabhágavuttino viharantå imasmim dhammavinaye 
vuddhim тігі vepullam ápejjissanti. anujdodmi bhi- 
kkhave dasa vassåni nissåya vatthum, dasavessena nissayam 
datum.|1|| evañ ca pana bhikkhave åcariyo gahetabbo : ekam- 
sam uttarásangam karitvå påde vanditvå ukkutikam pisiditvå 
siljalim paggahetvå evam assa vacaniyo: ёсагіуо me bhante 
hohi, dyasmato nissåya vacchåmi, åcariyo me bhante hobi, 
áyasmato pissåya vacchåmi, ёсагіуо me bbante hohi, Ayas- 


1. 23. 2-35. 1.] MAHÅVAGGA, 61 


mato півайув vacchåmiti. ваб 'ti va, lahå "ti vå, opåyikan 
ti và, petirüpan ti và, páa&dikena sampádehiti và káyena 
viflflåpeti, våcåya уіййарей, kayena våcåya viññápeti, gabito 
hoti åcariyo, na kåyena viññápeti, na våcåya viiiüüpeti, na kå- 
yena våcåya vififiåpeti, na gabito hoti åcariyo. ||2]| antevå- 
sikena bhikkhave &cariyambi -sammåvattitabbam, tatråyam 
sammåvattanå: kålase eva uttháya upáhaná omuficitvà 
ekamsam uttaråsafigam karitvå dantakattham dütabbam, mu- 
khodakam dåtabbam, åsanam paefifiåpetabbam. васе yågu 
hoti, bhåjanam dbovitvå yågu upanåmetabbå. yågum pi- 
tassa udakam datvå bbájenam patiggshetvå nicam katvå 
eådhukam sparighamsantena dhovitvå patieåmetabbam . . . 
(= L. 25. 8-24; instead of upsjjhåyo, upajjháyam, efc., read 
&cariyo, åcariyam, еѓс.; instead of naddbivihårikene read ante- 
våsikena). . . васе ёсагіуо gilåno hoti, yåvajivam upattha- 
tabbo, vutthånassa ågametabban ti. ||3 |! 
åceriyavattam nitthitam. 18911 


ücariyena bhikkhave antevåsikambi aammavattitabbam, 
tatråyam sammåvattanå: åcariyena bhikkbave antevasi- 
ko samgahetabbo anuggahetabbo uddesena paripuccháya 
ovådena anusåsaniyå. васе ácariyassa patto hoti, antevåsi- 
kassa patto na hoti, Всагіуепв antevásikassa patto dåtabbo 
ussukkam vá kåtabbam kin ti nu kho antevåsikassa patto 
uppajjiyetha "і. васе åceriyassa civaram . . . (=I. 20. 1-11; 
instead of upajjhayo, etc., read acariyo; tnatead of saddhivihå- 
riko, efc., read antevåsiko) . . . sace antevåsiko gilåno hoti, 
yåvajivam upatthütebbo, vuttbånassa Agametabban ti. [[ I || 

antevåsikavattam. |89|| chattham bhánaváram. 


tena kho pana samayena antevåsikå åcariyesu na sammå- 
vattanti . . . (= I. 27. 1-8; snafead of åcariyo, etc., read as 
abore) . . . apspámento anatisåro hotiti. 111341 


tena kho pana eamayene bhikkhü dasavass’ amhá dasavass’ 
ambå ”ti bålå avyattå nissayam denti, dissanti &cariyá bala, 
antevåsikå panditá, dissanti åcariyå avyattá, antevåsikå vyatta, 
dissanti ёсагіуё appassutå, antevásiká babussutå, dissanti &ca- 
riyå duppafifia, antevåsikå pafiflavanto. уе te bhikkhf appi- 


62 MAHÁYAGGA. I. 88. 1-96. 3. 


ochå, te ujjháyanti kbiyanti vip&centi : каар hi nåma bhi- 
kkhú dasavass’ amhá dasavass’ amhá 'ti bald avyatt& nissayam 
dassanti, dissanti åcariyå bålå . . . antevåsikå paññavanto 
"ti. |li atha kho te bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham åro- 
cesum.  saccam kira bhikkhave dasavass’ ambhá dasavass’ 
amhá 'ti bålå avyattd nissayam dentiti. saccam bhagava. 
vigarshi buddho bhegavå. vigarahitva dhammikatham 
katvå bhikkhü åmantesi: na bhikkhave bålena avyattena 
nissayo dátabbo. yo dadeyya, Apstti dukkatassa. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave vyattena bhikkhund patibalena dasavaesena 
và atirekadasavassens vå nissayam dåtun ti. 2/361 


tena kho pana samayena bhikkhü Aeariyupsjjháyesu pa- 
kkantesu pi vibbhamantesu pi kAlamkstesu pi pakkhasam- 
kanteau pi niesayapatippassaddhiyo na jánanti. bbagavato 
etam attham årocesum. paño’ im& bhikkave nissayapati- 
ppassaddbiyo upajjháysmbhà : upsjjhåyo pakkanto và hoti 
vibbhamanto vå kálamketo vå pakkhasamkanto vå, Anatti 
yeva райсаші. imå kho bhikkhave pañca nisssyapatippasaa- 
ddhiyo upajjháyamb& cha yimå bhikkhave nissayapatippas 
ssaddhiyo &cariyamhá : &cariyo pakkanto và hoti vibbhamanto 
'vå kålamkato và pakkhassmkanto vá, âņatti yeva paficami, 
upajjhåyena vá samodhánum gato hoti. ima kho bhikkhave 
cha nissayapstippassaddhiyo åcariyambé. |11 paficahi bhi- 
kkhave angehi samannågatena bbikkhunå na upasampáde- 
tabbam, na nissayo dátabbo, na sAmanero upatthüpetabbo : 
na asekhena silakkhandhena samennágsto hoti, pa ase- 
khena esm&dhikkhandhena samennågato hoti, na asekhena 
райћёккћапаћепа samannågato hoti, na asekhena vimutti- 
kkhandhena samannágato hoti, na asekhena vimuttiflana- 
dessanakkhandhena samannágato hoti. imehi kho bhi- 
kkhave райсаһ' angehi aamannügatena bbikkhunå na upa- 
sampádetabbam, na nissayo dåtabbo, ne sÁmapero upatthå- 
petabbo. 12]  paficahi bhikkhave angehi samannågatene 
bhikkhunà upasampadetabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, sAmaygero 
upatthåpetabbo: asekhena stlakkhandhena samannágato hoti, 
- .. asekhens vimuttifidnadassanakkhendhena samannágato 
hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave paücah' angehi samannágatena 


I. 9. 3-9.] MAHÅVAGGA. 63 


bhikkhuná upesampådetabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, såmanero 
upatthåpetabbo. |131 aparehi pi bhikkhave peficah’ angebi 
samannågatena bhikkhuná na upesampådetabbam, пе nissayo 
dåtabbo, na såmanero upstthåpetabbo: attanå na asekhens 
silakkhandhena samannágato hoti, na param asekhe sila- 
kkhandhe samådapetå, . . . attand na asekhena vimuttifiáns- 
dassanakkhandhena samannágato hoti, na param asekbe 
vimuttifiAnadassanakkhandhe samådapetå. imehi kho bhi- 
kkhave paficah' afigehi samannégatena bhikkhun& na upa- 
sampádetabbam, na nissayo dåtabbo, na eåmanero upatthå- 
petabbo. |14] рейоаһі bhikkhave efigebi eamanndgatepa 
bhikkbunå upasampådetabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, sAmanero 
upatthápetabbo : attanå asekhena silakkhandhena samannå- 
gato hoti, param asekhe silakkhandhe samådapetå, . . . attanå 
asekhena vimuttifidnadassanakkhandhena samannågato hoti, 

n asekhe vimuttifidpadassanakkhandhe samådapetå. 
imehi kho bhikkhave райсаһ’ angehi samanndgatena bhi- 
kkhun& upasampidetabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, såmanero upa- 
ttbåpetabbo. ||5|| aparehi pi bhikkbave pañcah' angehi 
samannågatena bbikkbunå na upasampådetabbam, na піввауо 
databbo, na sámanero upatthåpetabbo : assaddho hoti, ahiriko 
boti, anottappt hoti, kusito hoti, muttbassati hoti. imehi kho 
bhikkhave paficah’ angehi samannågatena bhikkhuná na 
upesampádetabbam, na nissayo dåtabbo, na såmenero upa- 
tthåpetabbo. |161 pañcahi bhikkhave angehi samannága- 
tena bhikkhun& upasampádetsbbam, nissayo databbo, såma- 
gero upattbåpetabbo: saddbo hoti, birimå hoti, ottappi 
hoti, &raddhaviriyo hoti, upatthitasati hoti. imebi kho bhi- 
kkhave pancah' angehi samannågstena bhikkhunå upasampå- 
detabbam, pissayo dåtabbo, såmanero upattbåpetabbo. ||7 || 
aparehi pi bhikkhave pañcah’ angehi samannágatena bhi- 
kkhunå na upessmpådetabbem, na npissayo dátabbo, па 
såmanero upatthápetabbo: edhisile silavipanno boti, sjjhå- 
саге Åcåravipanno hoti, atiditthiyå ditthivipanno hoti, appa- 
øsuto hoti, duppafiio hoti. imehi kho bbikkhave paficah' 
angehi samanndgatena bhikkhuné na upasampádetabbam, na 
nissayo dåtabbo, па eåmanero upatthåpetabbo. ||8|| paficabi 
bhikkhave efigehi samannågatens bhikkhun& upasampåde- 


64 MAHÅVAGGA. [I. 38. 9-13. 


tabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, såmanero upatthåpetabbo : na adhi- 
вПе silavipanno hoti, na ajjbåcåre åcårevipauno hoti, na 
etiditthiyá ditthivipanno hoti, bahussuto hoti, pàññavá hoti. 
imebi kho bhikkbave peficah' angehi samannagatena bhi- 
kkhunå upasampådetabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, sàmanero upa- 
tthåpetabbo. |9|| врагеһі pi bhikkhave paiicah’ arigehi 
samannágatena bhikkhunå na uposampüdetabbam, na nissayo 
dåtabbo, na såmanero upatthåpetabbo : na patibalo hoti ante- 
våsim vå saddbivibårim vå gilánam upatthdtum vå upatthå- 
petum vá, uppannam anabbiratim vüpakásetum và vüpakà- 
såpetum vá, uppannam kukkuccam dhammato vinodetum và 
vinodåpetum và, ápattim na jånåti, ápattiyà vuttbånam па 
janati. imehi kho bhikkhave paücah' engehi eamannåga- 
tena bbikkhunå ne upasampádetabbam, па nissayo dåtabbo, 
na såmanero wupatthåpetabbo. ||lO|| paficabi bhikkhave 
ajigehi samenndgatena bhikkhuná upesampádetabbam, ni- 
asayo databbo, såmanero upatthåpetabbo : patibalo hoti ante- 
våsim và saddhivihårim và gilånam upatthdtum và upatthå- 
petum vå, uppannam anabhiratim vüpakásetum và vüpa- 
kåsåpetum va, uppannam kukkuccam dhammato vinodetum 
và vinodåpetum vå, åpattim jånåti, ápattiy& vuttbånam janati. 
imehi kho bhikkhave райсаћ’ angehi samannågatene bhi- 
kkhunå upasampådetabbam, niseayo dåtabbo, såmanero upa- 
tthåpetabbo. 1111 aparehi pi bhikkhave райсаһ' angehi 
samannågatena bbikkhunå na upasampAdetabbam, na nissayo 
databbo, na såmanero upatthapetabbo: na patibalo hoti ante- 
vüsim vå saddbivibårim vå abbisemåcårikåye sikkhaya si- 
kkhåpetum, ådibrahmacariyikåya sikkhåya vinetum, abbi- 
dbamme vinetum, ebhivingye vinetum, uppannam ditthiga- 
tam dhammato vivecetum vivecüpetum. imebi kho bhi- 
kkhave pañcah’ angebi samannågatens bbikkhunå na 
upassmpådetabbam, na nissayo dåtabbo, na såmanero upa- 
ttbåpetabbo. 111211 райсаһі bhikkhave впдеһї samannå- 
gatens bhikkhun& wupasampådetebbam, nissayo dåtabbo, 
såmanero upatthåpetabbo: patibalo hoti antevåsim vA sa- 
ddhivihårim và abbisamåcårikåya sikkháya sikkhåpetum, 
ådibrahmaceriyikåys sikkbåya vinetum, abhidhamme vi- 
netum, abbivinaye vinetum, uppannam dittbigatam dham- 


T. 6. 13-87. 1.] MAHAVAGGA. 65 


mato viveoetum vivecåpetum. imehi kho bhikkave paficah’ 
aügehi samanndgatena bhikkhuná upasampadetabbam, nissa- 
yo dåtabbo, såmanero upatthdpetabbo. ||l3| aparehi pi 
bhikkhave paiicah’ angehi samannågatena bhikkhunå па 
upasampadetabbam, na nissayo dåtabbo, na såmanero upa- 
tthåpetabbo : Apattim пе jånåti, anåpattim na jånåti, lahukam 
åpsttim na jånåti, gsrukam åpattim na jAnati, ubbayåoi kho 
pan’ assa pátimokkháni vittbårena na svågatåni honti, na 
suvibhattåni, na suppevattini, na euvinicohitåni suttato anu- 
vyafljanaso. imehi kho bhikkhave paficah' angehi samannå- 
gatena bhikkhuná na upasampédetabbam, na nissayo då- 
tabbo, na såmanero upstthapetabbo. [14]  paficebi bhi- 
kkhave angehi samannågatena bhikkhonå upasampáde- 
tabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, såmanero upatthåpetabbo: Apattim 
jånåti, anåpattim jånåti, lahukam Apattim jånåti, garukam 
Apatiim ján&ti, ubhayåni kho pan’ assa påtimokkhåni vitthá- 
rena svågatåni honti suvibhattáni euppavattini suvinicchitàni 
suttato annvyafijanaso. imehi kho bbikkbave paficah' afige- 
hi samanndgatena bhikkhun& vopasampádetabbam, nissayo 
dåtabbo, såmanero upetthåpetabbo. 151 aparebi pi bhi- 
kkhave paficah' angehi samannågatene bbikkhunå na upa- 
sampádetabbam, na nissayo dåtabbo, na såmanero upattbåpe- 
tabbo: Apattim na jånåti, an&pattim ne jånåti, lahukam 
&pattim na ján&ti, garukam åpattim na jånåti, dnadasavasso 
hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave paücsh' angehi samannágatena 
bhikkhunå na upasampådetabbam, na nissayo dåtabbo, na 
såmanero upatthápetabbo. |1161 paficahi bhikkhave angehi 
samannågetena bhikkbunå upasampádetabbam, nissayo dá. 
tabbo, såmanero upstthapetabbo: Apattim jånåti, anüpattim 
jånåti, lahukam åpattim jánáti, gerukar Apattim ján&ti, da- 
savasso và hoti atirekadasavasso vá. imehi kho bhikkhave 
peficah' angehi samanndgatens bbikkhund upassmpáde- 
tabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, sAmanero upatthápetabbo ”ti. [117 || 
upssampådetabbapaficakam sojasavåram pitthi- 
tam. (861! 


chahi bhikkhave angehi samannágetena bbikkhoné na 
upasampådetabbam, na nissayo dåtabbo, na såmanero upa- 


You. ш. 6 


66 MAHAVAGGA. [1.87 1-6. 


tthápetabbo : na asekhena eflakkhandhena samsunågato hoti, 
na asekhena samádhikkhandhens s. h., па asekhena pafifiå- 
kkhandhena s. h., na asekhena vimuttikkhandhena s. h., na 
asekhene vimuttifidnadessanakkhandhens в. h., ünadasavasso 
hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave chah’ angehi samannågatena 
bhikkhuná ne upasampádetabbam, na nissayo dátabbo, na 
eåmanero upatthapetabbo. ||lj chahi bhikkhave angehi 
samannågatena bhikkhuné upasampádetabbam, nissayo då- 
tabbo, såmanero upatthápetabbo: asekhena silakkhendhene 
samannågato hoti, . . . asekhena vimuttifiåpadassanakkhan- 
dhena в. h., dasavasso vå hoti atirekadasavasso vå. imehi kho 
bhikkhave ohah' angehi samannágatena bhikkhonå upa- 
eampådetabbarn, nissayo dátabbo, simanero upatthåpetabbo. 
121 eparebi pi bhikkhave сһаһ’ angehi samannágatena 
bbikkhunå na upesampádetabbam, na nissayo dátabbo, na 
såmanero upatthápetabbo : attanå na asekhena silakkhandhe- 
na samanpágato hoti, na param asekhe silakkhandhe samå- 
dapetå, . . attanå na asekhena vimuttiflånadassanakkhandhe- 
na в. h., na param asekhe vimuttifidnadassanakkhandhe 
samådapetå, ünadasavasso hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave chah’ 
angehi samanpágatena bhikkhun& ne upasampádetabbam, ne 
niesayo dåtabbo, na såmanero upatthApetabbo. [34 chabi 
bhikkhave efigehi samannágatena bhikkhunå upasampåde- 
tabbam, niessyo dåtabbo, såmanero upetthåpetabbo: attanå 
asekhena etlakkhandhens samannågato hoti, param asekhe 
silakkhandhe samådapetå, . . . attanå asekhena vimuttiflåna- 
dagsanakkhandhena samannågato hoti, param asekhe vimutti- 
fiåpadamsanakkhandhe samådapetå, dasavasso vá hoti atire- 
kadasavasso và. imehi kho bhikkhave chah' afigebi sam- 
annågatens bhikkhuná upasampådetabbam, nissayo då- 
tabbo, såmanero upatthåpetabbo. | 4|| aparehi pi bhikkhave 
chah’ angehi eamenndgatena bhikkhun& na upessmpåde- 
tabbam, na nissayo dátabbo, na sámanero upatthüpetabbo : 
easaddho hoti, ehiriko hoti, anottappi hoti, kusito hoti, 
mutthassati hoti, ünadasavasso hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave 
chah’ angehi samannügatena bhikkbuné na upasampåde- 
tabbem, па nissayo dåtabbo, na sámanero upstthåpetabbo. 
151 chahi bhikkhave efigehi samannågatens bhikkhunå 


I. 87. 6-10.] MAHÁYAGGA. 67 


upasampådetabbam, nissayo ditabbo, såmanero upatthüpe- 
tabbo: eaddho hoti, hirimå hoti, ottappt hoti, áraddhaviriyo 
hoti, upatthitasati hoti, dasavasso vå hoti atirekadasavasso 
vå. imehi kho bhikkhave сһаһ’ angehi samannágatena bhi- 
kkbunå upasampådetabbam, nissayo "dàtabbo, såmanero upa- 
tthåpetabbo. 161 арагеЫ pi bhikkhave сһаһ’ angehi sam- 
anndgatena bhikkhun& na upasampádetabbam, na nissayo 
databbo, па såmanero upatthápetabbo : adhistle eilavipanno 
hoti, ejjbåcåre åcåravipanno hoti, atiditthiyé ditthivipanno 
hoti, appessutto hoti, duppafifio hoti, ünasdasavasso hati. 
imehi kho bhikkhave chah’ angehi samannágstena bhikkhu- 
nå na upasampådetabbam, па nissayo dåtabbo, na eAmanero 
upettbåpetabbo. |1711 cbabi bhikkhave angehi samannága- 
tena bbikkhunå upassmpådetebbam, nissayo dåtabbo, sima- 
nero upatthápetebbo : na adhisile silavipanno hoti, na ajjha- 
сёге Achravipanno hoti, ne atiditthiyå ditthivipsnto hoti, 
bahussuto hoti, pafiflavå hoti, dasavasso vå hoti atirekadaaa- 
vasso vå. imehi kho bhikkhave chah’ abgehi samannügatena 
bhikkhun& upasampddetabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, såmanero 
upetthápetabbo. ||8| aparehi pi bbikkhave сһаһ’ angehi 
sammannágatena bhikkhunå na upasampddetabbam, na 
nimayo dAtabbo, па såmanero upatthåpetabbo: na patibalo 
hoti antevüsim vá saddhivihárim vA gilånam upetthåtom và 
upetthápetam vá, uppannam ansbhiratim våpakåsetum và ` 
våpakåsåpetum và, uppannam kukkuccam dhammato vino- 
detam vå vinodápetum vå, ápattim ne jånåti, &pattiy& vattha- 
nam ne jånåti, ünadasavasso hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave 
chah’ aögehi eamannágatena bhikkhun& na upesampáde- 
tabbam, na nissayo dåtabbo, na såmanero upatthåpetabbo. || 9 || 
ohahi bhikkhave angehi samannågatena bhikkhun& upaeam- 
pådetabbam, nissayo dátabbo, eAmanero upatthåpetabbo: pati- 
balo hoti antevåsim vå saddhivibårim vå gilánam upetthátum 
và upetthåpetum vá, uppannam anebhiratim våpakåsetum vå 
våpakåsåpetum vá, uppannam kukkuooam dhammato vino- 
dotum vå vinodåpetum vá, åpattim jånåti, Apattiya vuttbå- 
nam jánáti, dasavaaso và hoti atirekadasavasso và. imebi 
kho bhikkheve obah’ angehi samannágatena bbikkhunå upa- 
sampádetabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, såmanero upatthüpetabbo. 


68 MAHAVAGGA. [I 37. 10-14. 


1101  eparehi pi bhikkhave chah’ &ngehi samannágatena 
bhikkhunå na upasampádetabbam, na nissayo dátabbo, na 
såmanero upatthápetabbo: na patibalo hoti antevüsim vå 
saddhivihárim vå sbhisamacfrikfya sikkhüya sikkhåpetum, 
Adibrahmacariyikåya eikkháya vinetum, abhidhamme vine- 
tum, sbhivinaye vinetum, орраопет ditthigstam dhamme- 
to vivecetum, ünadasavasso hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave chah’ 
afigehi samann&gatena bhikkhunà ne upssampådetsbbam, na 
nissayo dátabbo, na såmanero upattbåpetabbo. |111 chahi 
bhikkhave angehi samannågatena bhikkhun& upasampáde- 
tabbam, niasayo dåtabbo, simanero upatthåpetabbo: pati- 
balo hoti antevåsim vê saddhivihérim và abbisamåcårikåye 
sikkhåya sikkhåpetum, AdibrahmacariyikAya sikkhåye vine- 
tam, abbidbamme vinetum, abhivinaye vinetum, uppannam 
ditthigatam dhammato vivecetum, dasavasso va hoti atireka- 
dasavasso và, imehi kho bhikkhave chah’ angehi samanná- 
gatena bhikkhunå upasampádetabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, sa- 
manero upatthápetabbo. 12] врагећі pi bhikkhave chah’ 
afigehi samannågatena bhikkhun& na upasamp&detabbam, na 
nissayo dåtabbo, na såmanero upatthåpetabbo: Apattim na 
jandti, an&pattim na jånåti, lahukam &pattim na jånbti, garu- 
kam Apattim ne jånåti, ubbayåni kho pan’ assa påtimokkhåni 
vitth@rena па svågatåni honti, na suvibhattáni, na suppa- 
vattini, na suvinicchitàni suttato anuvyafijanaso, ûnadasa- 
vasso hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave сһаһ’ angebi samannå- 
gatena bhikkhuné na upasampådetabbam, na nissayo dåtabbo, 
na såmanero upatthåpetabbo. 113} chahi bhikkhave angehi 
samannágatena bhikkhun& upasampådetabbam, nissayo då- 
tabbo, såmanero upatthüpetabbo: åpattim jånåti, anåpattim 
jànáti, lahukam åpattim j&n&ti, garukam åpattim jàn&ti, 
ubhayáni kho pan’ aasa påtimokkbåni vitthárena svågatåni 
honti suvibbattåni suppevatttni suvinicchitåni suttato anu- 
vyafijanaso, dasavasso và hoti atirekadasavasso va. imebi 
kho bhikkhave chah’ engehi eamanvågatene bhikkhunå 
upasampádetabbam, nissayo dåtabbo, såmanero upatthåpe- 
tabbo ’ti. [| 141] 
upasempédetabbachakkam sojesavårsm nitthi- 
tam. |87 


L 88. 1-4.] MAHÅVAGGA, 69 


tena kho pana samayena yo во efiflatitt hiyapubbo upa- 
jjhdyena sahadhammikam vuccamåno upajjhfiyassa vádam 
åropetvå tam yeva tittháyatanam samkami, во puna рассА- 
gantvå bhikkhü upasampadam yåci, bhikkh( bhegavato etam 
attham årocesum. yo so bhikkhave afifiatitthiyapubbo upa- 
jjhayena sshedhammikam vuocamåno upajjhéyassa vádam 
&ropetyá tam yeva tittbåyatanam samkanto, so Agato na upa- 
sampådetsbbo. yo bhikkhave afifio pi afiflatitthiyapubbo 
imaamim dbammavineye àkankhati pabbejjam, &kenkhati upa- 
sampedam, tassa cattåro mise parivá&so dåtabbo. 111 evañ 
ca pana bhikkhave dåtabbo: pathamam kesamassum ohårå- 
petvå kåsåyåni vattháni acchådåpetvå ekamsam uttarå- 
eangam kåråpetvå bhikkhünam påde vandåpetvå ukkutikam 
nisidåpetvå afljalim paggaphüpetvà етет vadebiti vattabbo : 
buddham sarapam gaccbåmi, dhammam saranam gaochåmi, 
samgham earepam gaccbámi, dutiyam pi . .. tatiyam pi 
buddham saranam gacchümi, tatiyam pi dhammam sarapam 
gacchåmi, tatiyam рі samgham saranem gacohámiti. |||) 
tena kho bhikkhave aññatitthiyapubbena samgharn upasam- 
kamitvå ekamsam uttarásangam karitvå bhikkhünam раде 
vanditvå ukkutikam nisiditvå afijalim paggahetvå evam assa 
засвойуо: abam bhante itthannámo afifistitthiyapubbo ima- 
smim dhammavinaye &kankhámi upasampadam. во 'ham 
bhante eamgham cattAro måse parivåsam yåcåmiti. dutiyam 
pi y&ücitabbo. tatiyam pi y&citabbo. vyattena bbikkhunå 
patibalena samgho flåpetabbo: supátu me bhante samgho. 
ayam itthannåmo aififiatitthiyapubbo imasmim dhammavinaye 
Akankhati apasampedam. во samgham cattåro máse parivå- 
sam yücati yadi samghassa pattakallam, samgho itthannå- 
massa aññatitthiyapubbassa cattåro måse parivåsam dadeyya. 
eå ñatti. 1311 supåtu me bhante samgho. ayam itthannå- 
mo afifistitthiyapubbo imesmim dhammavinaye &kankhati 
upasampadam. so samghem cattåro mise parivåsam yácati. 
samgbo itthann&massa aiifiatitthiyapubbassa cattåro måse pa- 
rivàsam deti. yassåyasmato khamsti itthanpámassa afifia~ 
titthiyapubbessa cattáro måse parivásassa dånam, so tunh’ 
assa, yassa na kkhamati, so bhdseyya. dinno samghena 
itthannámassa aññatitthiyapubbassa oattåro måse parivüso, 


70 MAHÁYAGOA. [L 38. 4-8. 


khamati samghassa, tasmå tunhi, evam etam dhárayámiti. 
141 evam kho bhikkhave aññatitthiyapubbo &rádhako hoti, 
evam anårådhako. kathañ oa bhikkhave aññatitthiyapubbo 
anårâdhako hoti. idha bhikkhave afiflatitthiyapubbo atika- 
lena gåmam pavisati, atidivå patikkamati. evam pi bhi- 
kkhave aififiatitthiyepubbo anårådhako hoti. puna са param 
bhikkhave afifiatitthiyapubbo vesiyAgocaro và hoti, vidhavå- 
gocaro va hoti, thullakumérikagoosro vå hoti, pandakagocaro 
vå hoti, bhikkhunigocaro vá hoti. evam pi bhikkhave afiila- 
titthiyapubbo anárádhako hoti. | 51 puna ca param bhi- 
kkbave aññatitthiyapubbo уйш tani ssbrahmacáripar uccá- 
vacåni karapiyüni, tattha na dakkho hoti, na analaso, na 
tatrupåyåye vimamsåya aamannágato, na alam kåtum, па 
alam samvidhåtum. evam pi bhikkhave aññatitthiyapubbo 
anårådhako hoti. puna ca param bhikkhave aññatitthiya- 
pubbo na tibbacchando hoti uddese paripucohâya adhisile 
adhicitte adhipaññàya. evam pi bhikkhave aüfatitthiya- 
pubbo anür&dheko hoti. 161 puna ca param bhikkhave 
afiflatitthiyapabbo yasea tittháyataná samkanto hoti, tass 
eatthuno tassa ditthiyà tassa khantiy& tassa ruoiyå tassa AdA- 
yassa avanne bhafifiamaéne kupito hoti anattamano anabbi- 
raddho, buddhasaa và dhammasss vå samghassa vå avanne 
bhefifiamåne attamano hoti udsggo abhiraddho, узма vå 
pane titth&yatans samkanto hoti, tassa satthuno tassa ditthi- 
yå tasa khantiy& tassa ruoiy& tassa âdâyassa vanne bhañña- 
måne attamano hoti udaggo abbiraddho, buddhassa vå dham- 
masa vå samghassa үй vanne bhafillam&ne kupito hoti 
anattamano anabhiraddho, idam bhikkhave samghátanikam 
afiflatitthiyapubbassa anárádhaniyasmim. evam kho bhi- 
kkhave afifiatitthiyapubbo anårådhako hoti, evam anür&dhe- 
ko kho bhikkhave afiflatitthiyapubbo Agate na upssampåde- 
tabbo, 171 Кабай ca bhikkhave afiüatitthiyapubbo årå- 
dhako hoti. idha bhikkhave aifatitthiyapubbo nåtikålens 
gåmam pavisati, nåtidivå patikkamati. evam pi bhikkhave 
afiatitthiyapubbo årådhako hoti. puna са peram bhikkhave 
aflilatitthiyapubbo na vesiy&gocaro hot, na тійһатёдо- 
саго hoti, na thulløkumårikagocaro hoti, na pandakagocaro 
hoti, na bhikkhunigoosro hoti. evam pi bhikkhave añña- 


L. 88. 8-39. 1.) MAHAVAGGA, 71 


titthiyapubbo &rádhako hoti. |8] puna ca param bhi- 
kkhave afifiatitthiyapubbo yåni tåni sabrahmacårinem uccá- 
vacåni karaniy&ni, tattha dakkho hoti analaso tatrupáyüya 
vimarpsåya eamannågato, alam kåtum, alam samvidbåtum. 
evam pi bhikkhave aüfiatitthiyapubbo årådhako hoti. puna 
ca param bhikkhave aililatitthiyapubbo tibbacohando hoti 
uddese paripuochåya adhisile adhicitte adhipafiÁya. evam 
pi bhikkhave afiilatitthiyapubbo årådbako hoti. [9 puna 
ca param bbikkhave afifiatitthiyapubbo yasea titthdyatand 
samkanto hoti, tassa eatthuno tassa ditthiyå tasa kbantiyå 
tassa ruoiyå tassa ådåyasse avanne bhefidamåne attamano 
hoti udaggo abhiraddho, buddbassa vå dhammasea vå sam- 
ghassa và avanne bhaññamáne kupito hoti anattamano an- 
abhiraddho, yassa và pana tittbåyatanå samkanto hoti, tassa 
eatthuno tassa dittbiyå tassa khantiy& tassa ruciyå tassa AdA-/ 
vanne ЫһаййашАпе kupito hoti anattamano anabhi- 
raddho, buddbasss vå dbamwesea vá samghassa vá vanne 
ЪһаййашАпе attamano hoti udaggo abhireddho. idam bhi- 
kkhave samghátanikam aiifiatitthiyapubbasssa &r&dhaniya- 
emim. evam kho bhikkhave afifiatitthiyapubbo &rüdbako: 
hoti. evam årådhako kho bhikkhave afiflatitthiyapubbo åga- 
to upasampádetabbo. 1101 васе bhikkhave afiiatitthiya- 
pubbo naggo Agacchati, upsjjhåyamålakam civaram pariye- 
sitabbam. sace aovhinnakeso dgacchati, samgho apaloke- 
tabbo bhandukammiya, уе te bhikkhave aggikå jati-. 
lakà, te Agatå upasampådetabbå, na tesam parivåso dåtabbo. 
tam kisa beta. kammavådiuo ete bhikkhave kiriyevådino. 
васе bhikkhave jåtiyå Såkiyo afiflatitthiyapubbo ågaoohati, 
eo ågato upasampådetabbo, na tassa parivåso dåtabbo. imåham 
bhikkhave fidttoam åveniyam pariháram dammiti. || 11} з 
aññatitthiyapubbakathå. 1891 settamam 
bhénavéram. 


tens kho pane esmayena Magadhesu pafios &b&dhá 
uasanná honti kuttham gando kiláso soso apamáro. manusså 
paficahi åbådhehi phutthà Jivakam Komárabhaocam 
upasamkamitva evam vadanti: sádhu no &cariya tikicohábiti, 
aham kho ’yyo bahukioco behukeraptyo, rájá ca me Mågadho 


79 MAHÄVAGGA. (1. 39. 1-5. 


Seniyo Bimbisáro upatthatabbo itthågårafi ca buddbape- 
mukho са bhikkhusamgho, nåham sakkomi tikicchitan ti. 
sabbam såpateyyafl са te ёсагіув hotu, mayai са te dåså, 
sådhu no &cariye tikicchühiti. abam kho 'yyo bahukiceo 
bahukaraniyo, råjå са me Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro upa- 
tthåtabbo itthågårafi ca buddhapsmukho ca bhikkhusamgho, 
nåham sakkomi tikicchitun ti. |l|| ае kho team ma- 
nussånam etad ahoei: ime kho aamapA Sakyaputtiyå sukha- 
stlå sukbasamåcårå subhojanåni bhufijitvå nivåtesu sayanceu 
sayantL yam nina mayam samanesu Sakyaputtiyesu pabba- 
јеууётав, tattha bhikkhQ с’ ova upatthabissanti Jivako ca 
Komårabhacco tikicchiseatiti. atha kho te manusså bhikkhü 
upasamkamitvå pabbajjam yåcimsu, te bhikkhà pabbåjesum 
upasampådesum, te bhikkhü o’ eva upatthahimsu Jivako ca 
Komårabhaooo tikicehi. ||2|| tena kho pana samayena bhi- 
kkhü bahQ gilåne bhikkhü upatthahanté yAcanabahulé vi- 
fifiattibaholA viheranti gilAnabhattam дее; gilánupatthá- 
kabhattam detha, gilAnabhesajjam dethá ”ti. Jivako pi 
Komárobhaooo bah gilåne bhikkhü tikicchanto afiflataram 
råjakiocam parihApesi. |811 afifiataro pariso рейсаћі bå- 
dhehi phuttho Jivakam Komárabhaocarn upasamkamitvå etad 
avoca: sådhu mam ácariys tikiochåhiti. sham kho 'yyo 
bahukicco bahukeraniyo, råjå ca me Mågadho Seniyo Bimbi- 
edro upatthåtabbo itthågårafi ca buddhapamukho ca bhikkhu- 
samgho, nåbam sakkomi tikicchitun ti. sabbam sApateyyafi 
са te ёсагіув hotu, аһай ca te dåso, sådhu mam Acariya ti- 
kiechühiti. aham kho ’yyo bahukicoo bahuksraniyo, råjå са 
me Mágadho Seniyo Bimbisåro upetth&tabbo itthågårafi ca 
buddhapamukho ca bhikkbusamgho, náhem sakkomi tikicchi- 
tun ti. 14у atha kho tassa purisassa etad ahosi: ime kho 
валад Sakyeputtiyå sukhasilà sukhesam&cárá subhojanáni 
bhuijitvà nivåtesu sayanesu sayanti. yam nün&ham sama- 
nesu Sakyaputtiyesu pabbajeyyem, tattha bhikkhü с’ eva 
upattbahissanti, Jivako ca Komárabhaoco tikicchisssti, so 
"ham arogo vibbhamissámiti. atha kho so puriso bhikkhü 
upasamkamitvà pabbejjam yåci, tam bhikkhü pebbåjesum 
upasampådesum, tam bhikkhü c’ eva upatthahimsu Jivako 
ca Komårabhaceo tikiochi, eo arogo vibbhami. addasa kho 


I. 89. 5-40. 3.) MAHÅVAGGA. 73 


Jivako Komårabhacco tam purisam vibbhamantam, disvåns 
tam purisam etad avoca : папи tvam аууо bhikkhüsu pabba- 
jito ahoeiti. evam åcariyå "ti. kissa pane tvam ayyo evarü- 
pam akésiti. atha kho so puriso Jivakassa KomArabhaccasss 
etam attham årocesi. [6]| Jivako Komårabhacco ujjháyati 
khiyati vipáceti: каат hi nama bhaddanté paficahi Abå- 
dhebi phuttham pabbájeasantiti. atha kho Jivako Komåra- 
bhacco yena bhagavá ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bha- 
gavantam abbivådetvå ekamantsm nisidi. ekamantam nisin- 
no kho Jivako Komårabheoco bhagavantam etad avoca: 
sÁdhu bhante ayyå pañcahi åbådhebi phutthem na pabbå- 
jeyyun ti. |61 atha kho bhagavå Jivakam Komárabhaocam 
dbammiyå katháya sandassesi samådapesi samuttejesi sampa- 
hamsesi. atha kho Jivako Komårabhacco bhagavatà dham- 
miyå kathAya sandasaito sam&dapito samnttejito sampahamsi- 
to utthåyåsanå bhagavantam abbivådetvå padakkhinam katvå 
pakkåmi. athe kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne etasmim pa- 
karane dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü Amantesi: na bhi- 
kkhave paücahi åbådhehi phuttho pabbåjetabbo. yo 
pebbájey ya, &patti dukkataseá "ti. 171391 


tena kho pana samayena rafifio Magadhassa Seniyassa 
Bimbis&rasse paccanto kupito hoti. etha kho råjå Må- 
gadho Seniyo Bimbisåro senånåyake mahåmatte ånåpesi: 
gacchatha bhape paccantam ucoinatbå "ti. evam devå ”ti 
kho senånåyakå mabåmattå гаййо Mågadhassa Seniyassa 
Bimbisårassa paccassosum. ||| etha kho sbhififiétdnam 
-abhiññátánam yodhánam etad ahosi: mayam kho yuddhå- 
bhinandino gacchanté pápefi ca karoma bahufi са spufifiem 
pasaváma. kens nu kho mayam орёуера påpå ca virameyyá- 
ma kalyånafi ca kareyyåmå 'ti. atha kho tesam yodbånam 
etad sahosi; ime kho samap& Sakyaputtiyå dhammacárino 
samacárino brahmacårino saccavådino silavanto kaly&pa- 
dhammå. sace kho mayam samanesu fBakyaputtiyesu pabba- 
jeyyåme, evam mayam påpå ca virameyyåma kalyüpaü ca 
kareyyåmå ’ti. atha kho te yodhå bhikkhü upasamkamitva 
pebbejjam yácimsu te bhikkhü pebbåjesum upasampáde- 
воп. |21 senånåyskå mahåmattå rájabhate pucohimsu : kim 


74 MAHÅVAGGA. [I. 40. 3-48. 1. 


nu kho bhape itthennámo са itthannåmo ca yodhå na di- 
ssantiti, itthannåmo са itthannámo ca såmi yodhå bhikkhüsu 
pabbejità ”ti. senånåyakå mahámattà ujjbåyanti kbtyanti 
vipåcenti: katham hi náma samanå Sekyaputtiy& rájebhatam 
pabbåjessantiti. senán&yaká mahámattà гаййо Migadhaam 
Beniyassa Bimbisérassa etam attham Arocesum. atha kho 
råjå Mágadho Seniyo Bimbisåro vohårike mahåmatte pucchi : 
yo bhane rajabhatam pebbåjeti, kim so pasavatiti upsjjhå- 
yasa deva sisam chedetabbam, anussivakaasa jivhå uddhari- 
tabbå, ganassa upaddhaphásuká bhanjitabbà 'ti. [31 etha 
kho raja Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro yena bhagavå ten’ upa- 
samkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivådetvå ekam- 
antam nisidi. ekamantam nisinno kho råjå Mågadho Seniyo 
Bimbisáro bhagavantam etad avoca: santi bhante råjåno 
assaddhå appasannå, te appamattakena pi bhikkhü vihethe- 
yyum. sådbu bhante ayyé råjabbatam па pabbåjeyyun ti. 
atha kho bhagavá råjånam Mágadham Seniyam Bimbisåram 
dhammiyå katháya sandassesi samådapesi samuttejesi sampa- 
bamsesi. athe kho rájá Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro bhaga- 
vatå dhammiyé katbåye sandassito samádapito samuttejito 
eampahamsito wutthåyåsanå bhagavantam abhivådetvå pa- 
dakkbinam katvå pekkåmi. atha kho bbagavå etasmim 
nidáne etasmim pakarane dhammikatham katvå bhikkhd 
åmantesi : pe bhikkhave råjabhato pabbåjetabbo. уо 
pabbájeyye, Apatti dukkatasså "ti. [|4401 


tena kho рала samayena coro angulimálo bhikkhüsu 
pebbejito hoti. manusså passitvå ubbijjenti pi uttasanti pi 
pelayanti pi аййепа pi gacobanti аййепа pi mukham karonti 
dvåram pi thakenti. manussá ujjháyanti khiyanti vipåcenti: 
katham hi nima samapá Sakyaputtiyå dhajabaddham coram 
pabbåjessantiti. assosum kho bhikkhü tesam manussánam 
ujjbåyantånam khiyantànam vipácentànam. aths kho te 
bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham årocesum. bhagavå bhikkhü 
Amantesi : na bhikkhave dhajabaddho сого pabbåjetabbo. 
yo pabbåjeyya, Apatti dukkatassA ”ti. | 1141] 


tena kho pana samayena raññá Mågadhens Seniyena 


Lm 1-4. 1.) MAHÅVAGGA. 75 


Bimbisárena anuiifidtam hoti: ye samanesu Sakyaputti- 
yesu pabbajanti, ов te labbhá kifici kåtum, svåkkhåto dha- 
mmo, carantu brahmacariyam sammå dukkhassa antakiriyåyå 
‘ti tena kho pans samayens afifistaro puriso corikam katvå 
kåråya baddho hoti, so kåram bhinditvå palåyitvå bhikkhüsu 
pabbajito hoti. |11 manusså pessitvå evam Ahamsu: ayam 
во kårabhedako coro, handa nam nemá 'ti.  eksoce evam 
åbhamsa : måyyo evam avacuttha, anufifiåtam гайда Måga- 
dhens Seniyena Bimbisárena: ye samaneu Sakyaputtiyesu 
pabbajanti, na te labbbå kifici kåtum, svåkkhåto dhammo, 
carantu brabmecariyam sammå dukkhassa antakiriyåyå ”ti. 
manusså ujjhAyanti khiyanti vipåcenti: abhayüvará ime sa- 
maná Sekysputtiyà, na yime labbbå kiñoi kåtum. katbam 
bi påme kárabhedakem coram pabbåjessantiti. bhaga- 
vato etam attham árocesum. na bhikkhave kárabhedako 
coro pabbåjetabbo. уо pabbAjeyya, åpatti dukkatassá 
^i. 121421 


tena kho рапа ssmayena añfiataro puriso corikam katvA 
palåyitvå bhikkhüsu pebbajito hoti. во са таййо antepure 
likhito hoti yetthe passitabbo tattha hantabbo 'ti. manusså 
passitvå evam &hamsu: ayam so likhitako coro, handa nam 
hanámá 'ti. ekacce evam &hamsu: måyyo evam avsouttba, 
апаййй(аш . . . antakiriydya 'ti. manuseA ujjháyanti kht- 
yanti vipåcenti : abhayüvará ime mmanå Sekyaputtiy&, na 
yime labbhá kiflei kåtum. Бафет hi náma likbitakam 
coram pabbåjesmantiti. bhagavato etam attham &rooesum. 
na bhikkhave likhitako сого pabbájetabbo. yo pabbå- 
jeyya, åpatti dukknatasså "ti. 111431 


tens kho pana eamayena afifiataro puriso kasåhato kata- 
dandakammo bhikkhüeu pabbajito hoti. manusså ujjháyanti 
khiyanti vipécenti: katham hi nama samané Sakyaputtiys 
kasåhatam katadapdakammam pabbåjessantiti. bhagavato 
etam attham árocesum. na bhikkhave kasåhato kata- 
dandekammo pabbåjetabbo. yo pabbéjeyya, patti dukka- 
(азва "ti. 111441 


76 MAHÁVAGGA. 11. 45. 1-48, 3. 


tena kho pana samayens afifistaro puriso lakkhanáhato 
katadandakemmo bhikkhüsu pabbajito hoti manusså ujjhå- 
yanti khiyanti vipücenti: katham hi náma samaná Sakya- 
puttiyå lakkhap&hatam katadandakammam pabbájeesantlti. 
bhagavato etam attham árocesum. na bhikkhave lakkha- 
nåhato katadandakammo pabbåjetabbo. уо pabbåjeyye, 
Apatti dukkstasså "ti. | 11451 


tena kho pans samayena aññataro puriso inåyiko pelåyitvå 
bbikkbåsu pabbajite hoti. dhaniyå passitvA evam &hamsu: 
ayam so amhåkam in&yiko, handa nam пешӣ 'ti. ekacoe evam 
åhamsu: máyyo evam avacutths, anufillàtam гаййй Mága- 
dhena Beniyena Bimbisárena: ye samanesu Sakyaputtiyesu 
pabbsjanti, na te labbhà kifici kátum, svåkkhåto dhammo, 
carantu brahmacariyam sammá duhkhassa antakiriyåyå "ti. 
manussá ujjbüyenti kbiyanti vipácenti: abheyftvarå ime sa- 
manå Sakyaputtiyå, na yime labbbå kifici kåtum. katham 
hi оёте inàyikam pebbåjessantiti. bbagavato etam attham 
åroceaum. na bhikkhave ináyiko pabbåjetabbo. yo pabbå- 
јеуув, apatti dukkatassá "ti. |11461 


tena kho pans samayens afifiataro dåso palåyitvå bhikkh0- 
au pabbejito hoti. ayyik& passitvà evam Ahamsu: ayam so 
ambåkam dåso, hands паш nemá 'ti. ekacce evam åhamsu : 
máyyo . . . aptakiriyáy& 'ti. manusså ujjháyanti khiyanti 
vipácenti: abhayüvarü ime samaņå Sakyaputtiyå, na yime 
lubbbå kifici kátum.  katham hi ойша dåsam pabbájessanti- 
ti. bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. па bhikkhave dåso 
pabbåjetabbo. yo pabbåjeyya, åpatti dukkatasså "ti. [11147 |1 


tena kho pana samayena afifiataro kammårabhendu 
mAtdpitOhi saddhim bhapditvà &rámam gantvå bhikkhüsu 
pabbejito hoti. atha kho tassa kammårabbandusss måtåpi- 
taro tam kamrmårabbandum vicinentå åråmam gantvå bhi- 
kkhf pucchimsu: api bhante evarüpam dårskam passeyyå- 
tha "і, bhikkhd ejånem yeva åhamsu: na jåpåmå 'ti, apas- 
sam yeva Ёһатац па pessåmb 'ti. 111 atha kho tassa 
kammårabbapdussa måtåpitaro tam kammårabhandum vi- 


1. @. 2-49. 3.] MAHÅVAGGA. 77 


cinantå bbikkhüsu pabbajitam disvå ujjbåyanti kbiyanti vi- 
påcenti : alajjino ime samenå Sakyaputtiyå dussilà musåvå- 
dino, jånam yeva &hamsu: na jånåmå 'ti, passam yeva 
áhamsu: na passámá "ti, ayam dårako bhikkbüsu pabbajito 
‘ti. assosum kho bhikkhü tassa kammårabbandussa mátápi- - 
tunnam ujjhdyanténam kbiyantånam vipåcentånam. atha 
kho te bhikkhå bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujånå- 
mi bhikkhave samgham apaloketum bhendukemmiys 
"ti. 121481 


tena kho рапа samayens Råjagahe sattarasavaggiyå ' 
dårakå saháyaká honti, Up&li dårako tesam påmokkho 
hoti. atha kho Upálissa mátüpitunnam etad shosi: keno 
nu kho upåyena Upåli amh&kam accayena sukhañ ca jiveyya 
na ca kilameyyé ’ti. atha kho Upålissa måtåpitunnam etad 
&hosi: sace kho Upåli lekham sikkheyya, evam kho Upåli 
ambákam ассауепа sukhafi ca jiveyya na ca kilameyyå "ti. 
stha kbo Upålissa måtåpitunnam etad shosi: sace kho Upåli 
lekham sikkhissati, anguliyo dukkbå bhavissanti. sace kho 
Upåli gananam sikkheyya, evam kho Upåli amhåkam acca- 
yena sukbaü ca jiveyya na ca kilameyyå 'ti. |111 atha kho 
Upélissa måtåpitunnam etad ahosi: sace kho Upåli gananam 
sikkhissati, urassa dukkho bhaviesatL sace kho Upåli råpam 
sikkheyya, evam kho Upåli ambåkam aocayena sukhafl ca 
jiveyya na ca kilameyyé 'ti. atha kho Upåliesa måtåpi- 
tunnam etad shosi : sace kho Upåli rüpam sikkhissati, akkhi- 
ni dukkh& bhavissanti. ime kho samanå Sakyaputtiyå su- 
khastlå sukhesamåcårå subhojanáni bhuñjitvá niv&teeu saya- 
nesu sayanti. sace kho Upåli samanesu Sakyaputtiyesu 
pebbajeyye, evam kho Upåli amhákam eccayens sukbafi ca 
jiveyya na ca kilameyyå ’ti. ||21] assosi kho Upåli dårako 
måtåpitunnam imam kathüsallápam. аа kho Upåli dárako 
yena te dárak& ten’ upesamkemi, upasamkamitvå te dárake 
etad avoca: etha mayam ayyo samanesu Sakyeputtiyesu 
pabbajissámá ti. sace kho {уаш ayyo pabbajissasi, evam 
mayam pi pabbejissámá ”ti. atha kho te dårakå ekamekassa 
måtåpitaro upasamkamitvå etad svocum: anvjånåtha mam 
agürasmá' anagåriyem pabbejjáy& ‘ti. atha kho tesam dåra- 


78 MAHÅVAGGA. (1. 49. 3-80. 1. 


kAnam mátápitaro sabbe р’ ime dérakA esmanecchandé kalyá- 
pådhippåyå ‘ti anujånimsu. te bhikkhü upasamkamitva 
pabbajjam yåcimsu. te bhikkhü pebbájesum upasampáde- 
sum. ||3i te rattiy& paocüsssamayam paocuttháya rodanti : 
yågum detha, bhsttam detha, khádaniyam detbå 'ti. bhi- 
kkhü evam &hamsu: &gametha åvuso уйча vibháyati sace 
yågu bhavissati, pivissatha, sace bhattam bhavissati, bhuflji- 
esatha, saco khådaniyam bhavissati, khidissaths, no oe bha- 
vissati удда và bhattam vå khådaniyam vå, pindåya caritvA 
bhufijissatha 'ti. evam pi kho te bhikkhd bhikkhühi vucca- 
månå rodant’ eva: yágum dethe, bhattam detha, kbadani- 
yam detbå ’ti, senåsanam ühananti pi ummihanti pi. |141) 
aasosi kho bhagava rattiyå pacofsasamayam peccuttháya då- 
rakasaddam, sutvàna üyssmantam Ánandam Amantes: 
kim nu kho so Ananda dárakassa saddo ’ti. atha kho åyasmå 
Anando bhagavato etam attham árocesi. васса kira bhi- 
kkhave bhikkhü jånam ûnavisativassam puggalam upasampå- 
dentiti. seocam bhagavå.  vigarehi buddho bhagavá: ka- 
tham hi nima te bhikkhave moghapuriså jánam Опатіваб- 
vasam puggalam upasampådessenti. ||b||  ünavisativasso 
bhikkhave puggalo akkhamo hoti sttaesa uphassa jighaocháya 
pipåsåya damsamakasavütàtapasirimsapasamphassánam dur- 
uttànam durigat4oam vacanspethdnam uppennánam såriri- 
kånam vedanAnam dukkhánam tibbånam kharánam katu- 
Капаш asåtånam amanåpånam påneharåvam anadhivdsaka- 
jåtiko hoti. visativasso kho bhikkhave puggalo khamo hoti 
eitassa unhasse ... panshardnam edhivåsaksjåtiko boti n’ 
etam bhikkhave appasapninem vá pasádáya pesanpAnam vå 
bhiyyobhåvåya. vigarahitva dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü 
&mantesi: na bhikkhave jånem ünavisativseso puggalo 
upasampådetabbo. yo upasampüdeyya, yathådhammo káre- 
tabbo "ti. 16149 


tena kho pens samayens afifiataram kulam shivåtakero- 
gena kAlamkatam hoti, tassa pitåputtakå seså honti, te bhi- 
kkhüsu pabbajitva ekato "va pindáya caranti. atha kho so 
dårako pituno bhikkh&ya діпоёуа upedhåvitvå etad avoca: 
maybam рі tåta dehi, mayham pi tata debiti. manusså 


L. 80. 1-88. 2.) MAHAVAGGA. 79 


ujjhåyanti khiyanti vipåcenti: abrahmecårino ime samanå 
Bakyaputtiyå, ayam dárako bhikkhuniyå jåto "ti. assosum 
kho bhikkhü tesam manussånam ujjbáyantánam khtyantanam 
vipáoentánam. aths kho te bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham 
Árocesum. na bhikkhave fnapannarasavasso dårako : 
pabbåjetsbbo. yo pebbájeyya, Apatti dukkntasså "ti. |1160 0 


tena kho pena samayena Åyasmato А nandassa upatthá- 
kakulam saddham pasannam abivütakarogena kålamkatam 
hoti, dve са dårakå seså honti, te porånakena &cinpakeppena 
bhikkhü passitva opadhåvanti, bhikkhü apasddenti. te bhi- - 
kkhühi apesádiyamáná rodanti. atha kho åyaamato Anan- 
Чама etad abosi: bhagavatá pafifiattam na ûnapannarasa- 
vamo dårako pabbåjetabbo ’ti, ime ca dårakå ünapannarasa- 
vasså. kena nu kho up&yena ime dårakå na vinasseyyun ti. 
atha kho åyasmå Anando bhagavato etam attham Arocesi. 
nesahanti pana te Ananda dårakå каке uttepetun ti. ussa- 
hanti bhagevå ‘ti atha kho bhagavd etasmim nidåne 
etaxmim pakarane dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü åmantesi: 
enujánami bhikkhave ünapannarasavassam dárskam 
kAkuttepakam pabbåjetun ti. 111611 


tens kho pane sameyens åyasmsto U panandasss Sakya- 
puttassa dve sámanerá honti Kandako ca Mahako ca, te 
аййашаййаш düsesum. bhikkhO ujjbáyanti kbiyanti vipå- 
centi: katham hi nàma såmenerå evarüpam ерёсАгат áca- 
rissantiti. bhagavato etam attham árocesum. па bhikkhave 
ekena dve såmanerå upatthåpetabbå. уо upatthApeyya, 
Apatti dukkstasså ‘ti. 111521 


tena kho pans aamayena bhagavå tatth’ eva Rajagahe 
vaseam vasi, tattha hemantam, tattha gimham. manusså 
ujjhåyanti khiyanti vipücenti: Ahundarikå samanånam Sa- 
kyaputtiyånam diså andhakárá, ne imesam diså pakkhéyanti- 
ti. assosum kho bhikkhü team manussånam vjjbåyentånem 
kbfyantånam vipåcentånam. atha kho te bhikkhü bhaga- 
vato etam attham ёгосевоп. |11 atha kho bbagavå &ya- 
«mantam Anandam åmantesi: gaochånanda apåpuranam ådå- 


80 MAHÅVAGGA. LI. 83. 2-6. 


ya snuperivepiyam bhikkhünam &årocehi: iochat' åvuso 
bhagavå Dakkhipágirim cárikam pskkamitum. увад- 
yasmato attho, во &gscchatü "і. evam bhante "ti kho бувад 
Anando bbagavato patissutvå apåpurapam ñdàya anuparive- 
niyam bhikkhünam Arocesi: icchat' &vuso bhagavå Dakkhi- 
pÅgirim cårikam pakkamitum, yassdyasmato attho, so ñga- 
ochat 'ti. 20 — bhikkhü evam åkamsu: bhagavatà ávuso 
Ananda paññattam dasa vassåni nissåya vetthum, dasa- 
vassena nisseyam dåtum. tattha ca no gantabbam bha- 
vissati, nissayo ca gahetabbo bhavissati, ittaro ca vaso 
bhavinsati, puna ca paccdgantabbam bhavissati, puna ca 
nissayo gahetabbo bhavissati. васе amhükam Acariyu- 
psjjbåyå gemissanti, mayam рі gamissåme, no се ambå- 
kam åcariyupajjbåyå gamissanti, mayam pi na gamissåma. 
lahucittakata no åvuso Ananda pafifidyissatiti. 181 atha 
kho bhagavå oganena bhikkhusamghena Dakkhip&girim cå- 
rikam pakkåmi. atha kho bhagavà Dakkhindgirismim ya- 
tbåbbirantam viheritvå puned eva Råjagabam paccSgacchi. 
atha kho bhagavå Ayasmantam Anandam åmantesi: kim nu 
kho Ananda tatbågato oganena bhikkhusamghena Dakkhi- 
någirim cArikam pakkanto 't atha kho &yasmá Ánando 
bhagavato etam attham Arocesi. atha kho bhagavà etasmim 
nidåne etasmim pakarspe dhammikatham katvå bhikkbü 
&mentesi: anujün&mi bhikkhave vyattena bhikkhuná pati- 
balena рейса vassáni niss&áya vatthum, avyattena 
yAvajivam. |141 paficahi bhikkhave a&gebi samannágatena 
bhikkhunà na anissitena vetthabbam : na asekhena sila- 
kkbandhena samannágato hoti . . . (=I. 36, 2) . . . imehi 
kho bhikkhave paficah’ aiigehi samannågatena bbikkhunåé na 
anissitena vatthabbam. райсаћі bhikkbave апре samanná- 
gatene bhikkhun& anissitena vatthabbam: asekhena . . . 
(=I. 30,3)... imehi kho bhikkbave paficah’ afigebi sa- 
mannågatens bhikkhunå anissitena vatthabbam. ||D|| врагећі 
pi bhikkhave paücah' angehi eamannágatena bbikkhunå па 
anissitena vatthabbam: assaddho hoti. . . (=I. 36,6)... 
imehi kho bhikkhave paficah’ añgehi samannågatens bhi- 
kkhuná na anissitena vatthabbam. paficshi bhikkhave ange- 
hi samannågatena bhikkunå anissitena vatthabbam : saddho 


I. 83. 6-18.) MAHÁYAGGA. 81 


hoti . . . (=I. 86,7) . . . imehi kho bhikkhave paficah’ 
aiigehi samannågatena bhikkhunà anissitena vatthabbam. 
161 арегеһ pi... na anissitena vatthabbam: adhieile 
- . . (=I. 886,8)... imehi kho... па anissitena ve- 
tthabbam. n . enissitena vatthabbam : ne adhisile 
„..(=1. 36, 9). _ imehi kho... avissitens vatthebbam. 
171 aparehi рі... na aniesitena vatthabbam: apattim 
. » . (=I. 36, 14) . . . imehi kho... na anissitena vattha- 
bbam. рон . . + anissitena vatthabbam: åpattim ... 
(=I. 36, 15)... imehi kho . . . enissitena vatthabbam. 19] 
aparehi pi... ns anismsitena vatthabbam: åpattim . . . 
(=I. 86, 16) . . . Qnapaficavasso hoti. imehi kho . . . na 
anissitena vatthabbam. paficahi . . . aniesitens vatthabbam : 
Apattim . . . (=L 86, 17) . . . paiicavasso vå hoti ati- 
rekapaficavasso vi. imehi kho . . . anissitena vatthabbam. 
M98 chahi . . . па anissitena vatthabbam: na asekhena 
. (=I. 87, 1) . . . ûnapañcavasso hoti, imehi kho bhi- 
kkhave chah’ angehi samsnnágetena bbikkhupà na anissite- 
па vatthabbam. chahi .. . anissitena vatthabbam : asekhe- 
пе... (=1. 37, 2) . . . paficavasso và hoti atirekapafica- 
vasso vå imehi kho . . . врізкіќепа vatthsbbam. ||10 J 
aparehi pi bhikkhave chah’ angehi . . . па aniasitena va- 
tthabbam : assaddho . . . (=I. 97, 5) . . . tnapaficavasso 
hoti. imehi kho.. . na anisstena vatthabbem. chahi 
. . + anissitena vatthabbam: saddho . .. (=I. 37, 6)... 
paficavasso vå hoti atirekapaficavasso vå, imehi kho ... 
anissitena vatthabbam. ||ll| aperehi pi . . . na animitena 
vatthabbam : adhisile . . . (I. 97, 7) . . . ünapaficavasso 
hoti. imehi kho... na anissitena vattbabbam. chahi... 
auissitena vatthabbam : na edhisile . . . (=I. 37, 8)... pañ- 
cavasso vA hoti atirekapaficavasso va. imehi kho . . . anissi- 
tena vatthabbam. (12! aparehi pi . . . na anissitena va- 
tthabbam : åpattim . . . (=I. 97, 13) . . . duapaficavaseo 
hoti. imehi kho . . . ns aenissitena vatthabbam. chahi 
. + aniesitena vatthabbam : Apattim .. . (=I. 87, 14). 
paficavanso vA hoti atirekapaficavasso va. imehi kho ... 
anissitens vatthabban ti. |1359 
abhayåverebbånevåram nitthitem. 


voL. TIL в 


82 MAHÁY AGGA. [L &. 1-5. 


atha kho bhagsvá Råjagabe yath&bhirantam viheritvå 
yena Kapilevatthu tens cárikam pakkámi. anupubbena 
cárikam caramáno yena Kapilavatthu tad avasari. tatra 
sudam bhagavå Sekkesu vibarsti Kapilavatthusmim 
Nigrodhåråme. atha kho bhagavå pubbanhasamayam ni- 
våsetvå pattacivaram Adaya yena Suddbodanasea Sa- 
kkassa nivesanam ten’ opasamkami, upasamkamitvà pa- 
fiflatte Asane nisidi. atha kho Råhulamåtå devi Ráhula- 
kumåram etad avoca: eso te RAbula pitá, gacchassu dáyajjam 
yachbiti. | 1] athe kho Råhulo kumåro yena bhagavá ten’ 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavato purato atthåsi su- 
khà te samana oháyà ’ti atha kho bhagavå utthåyåsanå 
pakkåmi. atha kho Ráhulo kumáro bhagavantam pitthito 
-pitthito anubandbi dåysjjam me samana debi, dåyajjam 
me samana dehiti. atha kho bhagavå &yasnantam Sári- 
puttam Amantesi: tens hi {таш Såriputte Råhulakumåram 
pabbåjehiti. kath&ham bhante Ráhulakumáram pabbåjemi- 
ti 121 atha kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne etasmim pakarane 
dhammikatham Кабуд bhikkhü åmantesi: anujånåmi bbi- 
kkbave tihi saranagamanehi såmanerapabbajjam. evañ 
са pana bhikkhave pabbåjetabbo: pathemam kesamassum 
ohåråpetvå kåsåyåni vattbåui aoohådåpetvå ekamsam uttará- 
saüngam kåråpetvå bhikkhünam påde vandåpetvå ukkutikam 
nisidApetvA efijalim pegganhápetvà evam vadebiti vattabbo : 
buddbam saranam gacchAmi, dhammam saraņam gacchámi, 
samgham sarapam gacch&mi, dutiyam pi . . . tatiyam pi 
buddham saranam gecoháni, tatiyam pi dhammam saranam 
gacchåmi, tatiyam pi samgham earapam gaochámiti. anujå- 
nimi bhikkhave imehi tihi sarapegamanehi såmanerapabba- 
jjen ti. 131 etba kho &yasmá Såriputto RAhulakumárem 
pabbájesi atha kho Suddhodano Sakko yena bhagavá 
ten’ upesamkami, upasamkemitvå bhagevantam ebhiv&detvá 
ekamantam nisidi ekamantam півірпо kho Suddhodano 
Sakko bhagavantam etad evoca: ekåbam bhante bhaga- 
vantam varam yåcâmîti. atikkantavará kho Gotama tathi- 
gatå ti уай ca bhante kappati yañ са anavejjan ti. vadehi 
Gotamé 'ti. 1401 bbagaveti me bhante pabbajite ansppakem 
dukkham shosi, tatbå Nande, adhimattam Råhule. putta- 


I. 84. 5-68. 1.) MAHÅVAGGA. 83 


pemam bhante chavim chindati, chavim chetvå cammam 
chindati, cammam chetvå mamsam ohindati, mamsam ohetvå 
nbárum ohindati, nhárum obetvå atthim chindati, atthim 
chetvé atthimifijam åbaces titthati. sådha bhante ayyå ana- 
nuññátam mátápitühi puttam na pabbåjeyyun ti. ||5]| atha 
kho bhagavå Suddhodanam Sakkam dbammiyå katbåys 
sandamsesi samådapesi samuttejesi sampahamsesi. athe kho 
Suddhodano Sakko bhagavaté dhammiyà kathåya sandassito 
samédapito samuttejito ssmpahamsito utthåyåsanå bhaga- 
vantam abhivådetvå padakkhinam katvå pakkåmi. atha kho 
bhagavå etasmim pidåne etasmim pakarane dhammikatham 
katvå bhibkhü Amantesi: na bhikkhave ananufifiáto mà- 
tåpitåhi putto pabbåjetabbo. уо pabbåjeyye, åpetti du- 
kkatasað "ti. |6154] 


atha kho bhagavå Kapilavatthusmim yatbåbhirantam vi- 
haritvå yena Sávatthi tena cårikam pakkåmi. anupubbe- 
na cárikam caramáno yena Bávatthi tad avasari. tatra sudam 
bhagavå Såvatthiyam viharati Jetavane Anåtha- 
pindikassae åråme. tena kho pana samayena Ayasmato 
Båriputtassa upatthákekulam dyasmeto Såriputtasss san- 
tike ddrakam påhesi imam dárekam thero pabbåjett 'ti. atha 
kho &yasmato Såriputtassa etad ahosi: bhagavatå sikkhå- 
padam pañüsttam na ekena dve såmanerå upettbåpetabbå 
'ü, aya ca me Råhulo såmanero. kstham nu kho mayá 
patipajjitabban ti. bhagavato etam attham årocesi. anujå- 
nåmi bhikkhave vyattena bhikkhunà patibalena ekena dve 
såmanere upatthåpetum, yåvatake và pana ussahati ovaditum 
anusåsitum, távatake upatthápetun ti. 111551 


atha kho sámaneránam etad ahosi: kati nu kho emhákam 
sikkhåpedåni, katthe ca ambehi sikkbitabban ti. bhaguvato 
etam attham árocesum. anujánámi bbikkhave såmsanerånam 
dasa sikkhåpadåni, tesu ca såmanerehi sikkhitum: påpå- 
tipåtå versmani, sedinnådånå veramani, abrahmacari- 
yå vorament, musåvådå veramant, surámerayamajje- 
pamádattháná veramant, vikålabhojanå veramant, 
neccsgitavéditavisikadassand veramant, målå- 
gandhavilepanadh érapamandanavibhisanatthana 


84 MAHAVAGGA. (I. 86. 1-88. 1. 


veramani, uocásayanamahásayaná veramani, játarü- 
parajatapatiggahanå veramant.  anujánàmi bhikkeve 
såmanerånam imáni dasa sikkhápadáni, imesu ca såmanerehi 
sikkhitun ti. [111561 


tens kho pana samayena sámaperà bhikkhüsu agåravå 
appatisså asabhágevuttino vibarsnti. bhikkhd ujjbåyenti 
khtyanti vipácenti: katham hi nåma såmanerå bhikkhüsu 
agåravå appatisså asabhågevuttino viharissantiti. bhagavato 
etam attham árocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave paficah’ añge- 
hi samannágatassa såmanerasss dapdekammam kátum : 
bhikkhünam alåbbåye parisakkati, bhikkhünam anatthaya 
parisakkati, bhikkhünam avåsåya parisakkati, bhikkhd akko- 
sati psribhásati, bhikkhü bhikkhühi bhedeti. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave imehi paficah' angehi samannågatassa såmane- 
rassa dandakammam kátun ti. || [|| atha kho bhikkhünam 
etad ahosi: kim nu kho dandakammem kátabben ti. bha- 
gavato etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkbave &va- 
гарат káton ti tene kbo pens samayena bhikkhü såma- 
nerånarn sabbam samgbåråmam &varapam karonti. såmane- 
rå åråmam pavisitum alabbamånå pakkamenti pi vibbhamanti 
pi titthiyesu pi samkamanti. bbegavato etam attham &roce- 
sum. na bhikkhave sabbo samghåråmo åvaranam kåtabbo. 
yo kareyya, åpatti dukkatassa. anuján&mi bhikkhave yattha 
vå vasati, yattha vå petikkamati, tattha &varapam kåtun ti. 
121 tena kho pana вашауепа bhikkhd såmanerånam mu- 
kbadvårakam åbåram åverspam keronti. manusså yågupå- 
nam pi samghabhettam pi karontá såmanere evam vadanti : 
etha bhante yågum pivatba, etha bhante bhattam bhufijatha 
"ti. såmanerå evam vadanti: nåvuso labbhå, bhikkhübhi 
Avaranam katan ti. menusså ujjhåyenti kbiyanti vipåcenti. 
ketham hi ndma bhaddaniá såmaperånam mukbadvårakam 
Abåram Avaranam karissantiti. bhagavato etam attham aro- 
cesum, па bhikkhave mukhadvårako åhåro åvåranam kå- 
tabbo. yo kareyya, åpatti dukkatasså "ti. |3|] 

dandakammavatthum nittbitam. 071 


tena kho pana samayens chabbaggiyå bbikkht upa- 


I. 88. 1-61. 1.) MAHÁVAGGA. 85 


jjbüye anåpucchå såmenerånam &varapam karonti. upajjhá- 
yå gavesanti katham nu kho ambåkam såmenerå na dissanti- 
ti. bhikkhü evam &hameu: chabbaggiyehi &vuso bhikkhühi 
Bvaragam katan ti upsjjbåyå ujjh&áyanti khiyanti vip&centi: 
katham hi nama chabbaggiy& bhikkhü ambe anápucohá 
ainhikam e&maperánam ávarapam karissantiti. bhagavato 
etam attham Агосевшп. na bhikkhave upajjbåye anápucchá 
&тагапаш kåtabbam. yo kareyya, åpatti dukkatasså ’ti. 
111581 


tena kho рапа samayena ohabbagiyå bhikkhd theránam 
bhikkhünam eåmanere apalåjenti. therå såmam danta- 
kattham рі mukhodakam pi ganhanté kilamanti, bhagavato 
etam attham ároceeum. ns bhikkhave afifiasaa pariså apa- 
lájetabbá. уо apalåjeyya, Apatti dukkataaså "ti. 111659; 


tena kho pana samayena &yasmeto Upanandassa Sa- 
kyeputtassa Kandako nåma sámapero Kandakam nå- 
ma bbhikkbuoim düsesi. bhikkhü ujjbåyanti khiyanti vipå- 
centi: katham hi n&ma såmanero evarüpam anåcåram åca- 
rissatiti. bhagavato etam attham åÅrocesum. anuvjånåmi 
bhikkheve dasah’ angehi samanpagatam såmaneram n&se- 
tum: pånåtipåti hoti, sdinnådåyt hoti, abrahmecári hoti, 
musávádi hoti, mejjepáyi hoti, buddhassa avannam bhåsati, 
dhammasss avappam bhásati, samgbassa avannam bhásati, 
micchåditthiko hoti, bbikkhunidüsako hoti. anujånåmi bhi- 
kkbave imebi dasah’ angehi sarnann&gatam s&maperam nå- 
eetun ti. 1116801 


tena kho pana samayena afiflataro papdako bhikkhdsu 
pabbajito hoti, so dahsre-dahere bhikkhà upesamkemitvå 
evam vadeti: etha mam fyasmanto dûsethå 'ti. bhikkhü 
spasádenti: nassa pandake, vinasa pandaka, ko tayå attho 
"ti. so bhikkhfhi apasådito mahante-mahante moligalle så- 
шайеге upasamkamitvà evam vadeti: etha mam ñvuso 
dåsetbå "ti. sAmanerd apasddenti: nassa papdaka, vinasa 
psndaka, ko tay attho "і. so såmanerebi apesádito hatthi- 
bhande assabhande upasamkamitvå evam vadeti: etha mam 


86 MAHÅVAGGA. (L 61. 1-68. 1. 


Avuso düsetb& 'ti. batthibbandå assabbandå disesum. |11 |! 
te ujjhåyenti khiyanti vipácenti: papdakå ime samaná Sa- 
kyaputtiyå, ye pi imesam na pandakå, te pi pandake düsenti. 
evam ime esbbeva abrahmacárino 'ti. amsosum kho bhi- 
kkhû hatthibhandánam assabhandánam ujjbáyantánam khi- 
yantånam vipicenténam. athe kho te bhikkhü bhagavato 
etam attham åÅrocesum. pandako bhikkhave anupasam- 
panno na upasampádetabbo, upasampanno nåsetabbo "ti. 
121611 


tena kho pana вашауепа afillataro puråpakulaputto khina- 
kolafifio sukhumálo hoti. atha kho tassa purdpakulaputtessa 
khinakolafifisssa etad ahosi: aham kho sukhumålo na pati- 
balo anadhigatam và bbogam adhigantum adhigstam vá 
bhogam pbåtikåtum. kena nu kho aham upáyena викћай 
ca jiveyyam па ca kilameyyan ti, atha kho tassa purüpsku- 
laputtama Kkhinakolafifiesss etad ahosi: ime kho samanå 
Sakyaputtiya sukhastlå sukhesamåcårå subhojandni bhufljitvå 
nivåtesu sayanesu sayanti. yam nånåbam simam pattaci- 
varam patiyådetvå kesamassum oháretvá kåsåyåni vatthåni 
aochådetvå åråmam gantvå bhikkhühi saddhim samvaseyyen 
ti. 111 etha kho so purdpakulaputto khinakolafifio såmam 
pattacivaram patiyådetvå kesamassum ohåretvå kåsåyåni va- 
tthåni acohådetvå dramam gantvå bhikkhü abhivådeti. bhi- 
kkhü етет åharpsu: kativasso 'si tvam åvuso ”ti. kim etam 
åvuso kativasso nåmå 't ko pana te üvuso upajjháyo 'ti. 
kim etam åvuso upsjjbåyo nåmå 'ti. bhikkhå åyasmantam 
Upålim etad avooum : inghávuso Upåli imam pabbejitam 
anuyufljåbfti. 1211 atha kho so puråpakulaputto khinako- 
laiifio åyssmatå Upåliné anuyufljiyamåno etam attham ёго- 
севі. åyasmå Upáli bhikkhünam etam sttham årocesi. bhi- 
kkhü bhagaveto etam attham årocesum. theyyasamvá- 
sako bhikkhave anupasampanno na upasampådetabbo, upa- 
sampanno násetabbo. titthiyepakkentako- bhikkhave 


anupasampanno ps upesampådetabbo, upasampanno nåse- 
tabbo ‘ti. 131621 


tena kho pans samsyens аййа!аго någo någayoniyå atti- 


I. 8. 1-5.] MAHÅVAGGA. 87 


yati haráyati jiguochati. atha kho tassa någasss etad ahosi: 
kena nu kho aham upáyena någayoniyå ca parimucceyyam 
khippaü ca manussattam patilabheyyan ti. atha kho tassa 
någassa etad ahosi: ime kho samanå Sakyaputtiyå dhamma- 
cárino samacdrino brahmacårino saccavådino silavanto kalyå- 
nadhammá. sace kho sham samanesn Sekyaputtiyesa pabba- 
jeyyam, eváham någayoniyå са parimucoeyyam khippeii ca 
manuseattam patilabheyyan ti. 1111 atha kho so någo máns- 
vakavannena bhikkhü upasamkamitvà pabbejjam уйсї. tam 
bhikkhü pabbåjesum upasampá&desum. tena kho pana sama- 
yena во nágo aññstarena bbikkhunå sasddhim paccantime 
vihåre pativasati. atha kho so bhikkhu rattiyå pacciuasama- 
yam paccatthdys ajjhokàse cankamati. atha kho so någo 
tassa bhikkhuno nikkhante vissattho niddam okkami. ssbbo 
vibåro ahinå punno, vütapánehi bhog& nikkhantà honti. |21 
atha kho so bhikkhu vihéram pavisissåmiti kavåtam panå- 
mento addasa sabbam vibåram shiná punpam, våtspånehi 
bhoge nikkhante. disvåna bhito vissaram akåsi. bhikkhü 
upadhávitvà tam bhikkhom etad avocum: kissa tvam 
Åvuso vissarem akásiti, ayam Avuso sabbo vihåro ahinà 
punno, våtapånehi bbogå nikkhantå 'ti. atha kho so någo 
tens saddena patibujjhitva sake &aane nisidi, bbikkhü evam 
&hamsu: ko "si tvam åvuso 'ti. sham bhante про "і. kissa 
pane {таш Svuso evsrüpam akásiti. athe kho eo någo bhi- 
kkhünsm etam attham årocesi. bhikkhû bhagavato etam 
attham &rocesum. ||J|| atha kho bhagavå etasmim ni- 
dane etasmim pekerane bhikkhusamgham sannipåtåpetvå 
tam någem etad avoca: tumhe khv attha nágá avirü]hi- 
dhemmå imasmim dhammavinaye. gaccha tvam någe tatth' 
eva cátuddase pannarase ettbamiyå ca pokkhasm uposa- 
tham upavas, evam tvam någsyoniyå ca parimuociesasi 
khippefi ca manussattam patilabbissasiti. atba kho so någo 
avirdjhidhammo kiråham imasmim dhammavinaye 'ti dukkhi 
dummano assúni pavattayamáno vissaram karitvå pekkåmi. 
141 atha kho bhagavA bhikkhü åmantesi: dve ’me bhi- 
kkhave paocay& någassa sabhávapátukammáya, yadá са ssjå- 
tiyå methunam dbammam patisevati, yadå ca vissattho ni- 
ddam okkamati ime kho bhikkhave dve paccayá någnsm 


88 МАНАҮАООА. (1. 63. 5-08. 2. 


sabhåvapåtukammåye. tiracchanagato bhikkhave an- 


upasampanno na upasampádetabbo, upasampanno nåsetsbbo 
ti. 15168 


tena kho pana samayena aññataro шАратаКо måtaram 
jivitå voropesi. so tena püpakena kammena attiyati harå- 
yati jiguechati. atha kho tassa mánavakassa etad ahosi : 
kena nu kho aham upåyena imassa påpassa kammasaa ni- 
kkhantim kereyyan ti. stha kho tamea månevakssss etad 
ahoai: ime kho samanå Sakyaputtiyå dhammacárino sama- 
cárino brahmacårino saccavådino silavanto kaly&pasdhemmá. 
sace kho aham samanesu Sakyaputtiyesu pabbajeyyam, evå- 
ham imasaa påpassa kammassa nikkhantim kareyyan ti. |11 
atha kho so månavsko bhikkhü upesamkamitvé pabbajjam 
yüci. bhikkhû &yasmantam Upálim etad avocum: pubbe 
pi kho åvuso Upåli nágo månavakavannens bhikkhåsu 
pabbejito, iighåvuse Upåli imam månavakam anuyufijàhiti, 
atha kho so månavako åyasmatå Upålinå anuyuiljiyamáno 
etam ettham årocesi. åyasmå Upåli bhikkhünam etam 
attham drocesi. bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. 
måtughåtako bhikkhave anupssampanno na upasampåde- 
tabho, apassmpanno nåsetabbo ’ti. |12164 11 


tena kho pana samayena аййа{аго m&pavako pitaram jività 
voropesi. во tena pApakena kammena . . . (=I. 64, 1, 2) 
++. bhikkhû bhagavato etam attham årocesum. pitughá- 
tako bhikkheve anupasampanno na upssampådetabbo, upa- 
sampanno nåsetabbo "ti. || 11/651) 


tena kho pane samayena sambahulå bbikkht Sáketá 
Bávatthim addbdnamaggapatipennd honti. sntarå magge 
corá pikkhamitvå ekacce bhikkhü acchindimsu, eknoce bbi- 
kkhü banimsu. Såvattbiyå råjabbetå nikkhemitvå ekacco 
core aggahesum, ekacce corå palåyimsu. ye te palayimsn, 
te bhikkhüsu pabbejimsu, ye te gahitå, te vadbåya onfyanti. 
111 addasamsu kho te pabbajitå te core vadhåys oníya- 
måne, disvåns evam åhamsu : sådhu kho mayem palåyimhå, 
sachca mayam gayheyyåme, mayam рі evam eva hailileyya- 


I. 68. 2-69. 4.] MAHÅVAGGA. 89 


må ’t.  bhikkhü evam fhamsu: kim pana tumhe åvuso 
skatthà ‘ti. attha kho te pabbajità bhikkhQoam etam 
attham årocesum.  bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham åro- 
oesum. arahanto ete bhikkhave bhikkhà. arahantaghá- 
tako bhikkhave anupasampanno па upesampádetabbo, upa- 
eampanno nåsetabbo "ti. 12166 


tene kho pana samayena sambahulå bhikkhuniyo Såketå 
Såvatthim addbånamaggapatipannå honti. antarå magge 
corå nikkhamitvà ekaccá bhikkhuniyo acchindimsu, ekaccá 
bhikkhuniyo dåsesum. Såvatthiyå rájabhatA . . . (=I, 66, 
1.2)... bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham årocesum. bhi- 
kkhunidüssko bbikkeve anupasampanno na upasampå- 
detabbo, upasampanno násetabbo. samghabhedako bhi- 
kkhave anupasampanno na upasampådetabbo, upasampanno 
násetabbo. lohituppådako bhikkhave anupasampanno na 
upasampådetabbo, upasampanno nåsetabbo "ti. ||1/| 87 || 


tena kho pana samayena aññataro ubhatovyafijanako bhi- 
kkhüsu pabbajito hoti, so karoti pi kåråpeti pi. bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. ubbatovyafijanako bhikkhave 


anupasampenno na upasampådetabbo, upesampenno nise- 
tabbo 'ti. 1116811 


tena kho pana samayens bhikkhü anupajjbayakam upa- 
sampådenti. bhagsvato etam attham årocesum. na bhi- 
kkhave anupajjhåyako upasampådetabbo. yo upasampå- 
deyya, Apatti dukkatasså ”ti. 111 tena kho pana samayens 
bhikkhü samghena upajjháyena upasampådenti. bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. па bbikkheve вер hens upa- 
jjhåyena upasampddetabbo. yo upssampådeyya, араб 
dukketasså "ti. ||2|| tena kho pana samayens bhikkhü ga- 
nena upejjháyene upasampádenti. bhegavato etam attham 
årocesum. na bhikkhave ganena upajjhayena upesampá- 
detabbo. yo upasampådeyya, Apatti dukkatasså 'ti. 13| tena 
kho pana eamayena bhikkhü pandakupajjhdyena upasampå- 
denti — gba —, theyyasamvåsskupsjjbåyena upasampåden- 
ti, titthiyapakkentakupajjhayena up., tirecchánagatupajjhá- 


90 MAHÅVAGGA. (I. OG. 4-70. 6. 


yena up., mátughatakupajjbáyens up., pitughAtakupajjhayena 
up., arahantaghåtakopsjjbåyens up., bhikkhuntdûsakupa- 
jjháyena up., samgbabhedakupajjhayens up., lohituppådaku- 
pajjbåyena up. ubhatovyaijanakupajjhAyena upasampådenti. 
bhagavato etam attham drocesum. na bhikkhave panda- 
kupejjbáyena upasampádetabbo, па thoyyasamvása- 
kupajjhåyena upasampådetabbo . . . na ubhatovyaiija- 
nakupajjháyena upasampådetabbo. yo upasampádoyya, 
Apatti dukkatasså "ti. 1416911 


tens kho pana samayena bhikkhü apattakam upasampå- 
denti  haithesu pindáya caranti. manusså ujjháyanti khi- 
yanti vip&centi: seyyathápi titthiy& "ti. — bhagavato etam 
attham årocesum. ne bhikkhave apattako upssampáde- 
tabbo. yo upasampådeyya, Apatti dukkatasså ”ti. |1] tena 
kho pana samayena bhikkhü actvarakam upesempådenti. 
naggå pindåya caranti. manusså ujjbåyenti khiyanti vipå- 
centi: seyyathåpi titthiyå "ti. bhagavate etam attham åro- 
eesum. na bhikkhave acivarako upasampádetabbo. yo 
upssampådeyys, &petti dukkatasså 'ti. |21] tena kho pans 
samayena bhikkhü apettacivarakam upsmmpådenti. naggå 
hatthesn pindáys caranti. manusså ujjbáyanti kbfyanti vi- 
pácenti: seyyathdpi Gtthiy& 'ti. bhagavato etam attham 
árocesum. na bhikkhave apattactvarako upasampåde- 
tabbo. yo upasampådeyys, &patti dukkatasså 'ti. |3|| tena 
kho pana samayena bhikkhü y&citakena pattenas upasampé- 
denti.  upassmpanne pattam patiharanti, hatthesu pindåys 
caranti. manusså ujjháyanti khiyanti vip&oenti: seyyathApi 
titthiyé ‘ti. bhagevato etam attham árocesum. па bhi- 
kkhave yåcitakona pattena upasampüdetabbo. уо upa- 
sampådeyye, ápstti dukkatassá 'ti. [|4 tena kho pana 
samayena bhikkhü yåcitakens civarena upasampådenti. upa- 
eaxmpanne civaram petihsrenti, naggá pindáya carsuti. ma- 
nussá ujjhåyanti khiyanti vipácenti: seyyathåpi titthiy& "ti. 
bhagavato etam attham árooesum. na bhikkhave yåcita- 
kens ofvaerene upasampádetabbo. yo upasampådeyye, 
ёраб duklatassá 'ti. ||5]] tena kho pans samayena bbikkhå 
yåcitakena pattacivarena npasampádenti upasampanne pa- 


I. 16. 6-78. 2.] MAHÁYAGGA. 91 


ttaoivaram patiharsnti, парра hatthesu pindáya caranti. 
manusså ujjbåyanti khiyanti vip&centi : seyyathüpi titthiyå 
‘ti. bhagavato etam attbam &rocesum. na bhikkhave yåoi- 
takens pattacivarena upasampüdetabbo. yo upasampá- 
deyye, åpatti dukkatasså 'ti. |61701  naupasampáde- 
tabbekavisativdram nitthitam. 


tens kho pana samayena bhikkhü hatthaochinnam pabbá- 
jenti — gha —, pådscchinnam pabbåjenti, hstthapAdacchi- 
nnam p. kagpacobinnam p., násacohinnam p., kepnand- 
saochinnam p., angulicchinnam p., alacchinnam p., kanda- 
racohinnam p., phanahetthakam p., kbujjam p., vàmanam p., 
galagandim p., lakkban&hatam p., kasåhatam p., likhitakam 
p» sipsdim p., páparogim p., perisadüsakam p., kåpam p., 
kanim p., khaüjam p., pakkbahatem p., chinniriyApatham 
р., jarddubbalam p, andham p, mügam p., badhiram p., 
andhamügam p., andhabadhiram p., mfgabedhiram p., 
andbemfigabadbiram pabbåjenti. bhagavato etam attham 
&rocesum. |11 па bhikkhave hatthaochinno pabbåje- 
tabbo, na pådscohinno pabbåjetabbo . . . na andhamá- 
gsbadhiro pebbájetabbo. yo pabbåjeyye, ёра dukka- 
tasså ”ti. |2]  nepebbájetabbadvattimsaváram ni- 
tthitam. 1711 

déyajjabhanavaéram nitthitam navamam. 


tena kho pana samayens ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü alajji- 
nam nissaysm denti. bhagavato etam attham 
na bhikkhave alajjinam nissayo dåtabbo. yo dadeyya, Apatti 
доккаѓавай 'ti. tena kho pana asmayena bhikkhü alajjinam 
nissáya vasanti, te pi na oirass eva alsjjino honti рёра- 
bhikkhü. bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. па bhikkhave 
slajjinem nissåye vatthabbam. уо vaseyya, åpstti du- 
kkatasså "ti. |11] atha kho bhikkhünam etad ahosi: bhaga- 
vata pafifiattam па alajjinam nissayo dátabbo, na alsjjinam 
nim iya vatthabban ti. katham nu kho mayum jáneyyüma 
lajjim vå alajjim vá 'ti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 
snujånåmi bhikkhave catühspaficáham &gumetum yåve bhi- 
kkhussbhågatam jånåmiti. 12172 


92 MATAYAGGA. (I. 73. 1-74 1. 


tens kho рапа samayene afiflataro bhikkhu Kosalesu 
janapadesu addhånsmaggapstipanno hoti. atha kho tassa 
bhikkhuno etad ahosi: bhagavatá pafifiattam па anissitena 
vatthabban ti, аһай o' amhi nissayakarapiyo addhånemsgga- 
patipanno. katham nu kho mayá patipajjitabben ti. bhaga- 
vato etam attham &árocesum.  anuján&mi bhikkhave eddha- 
namaggapatipannena bhikkhun& nissayam alabhamá- 
nena anissitena vattbun ti.||1| tens kho pana samayens 
dve bhikkhf Koealesu janapadesu sddhdnamaggapstipanna 
honti, te añiñataram åvåsam upagacchimeu, tattha eko bhi- 
kkhu gilåno hoti. аа kho tassa gilánassa bhikkhuno etad 
&hosi: bhagavatå pafiflattam na anissitena vatthabban ti, 
аһай с' amhi nissayakaraniyo giláno. katham nu kho mayá 
potipejjitabban ti. bhagavato etam attham Arocesum. anu- 
jånåmi bhikkhave gilanena bhikkhun& nissayam alabha- 
mánena anissitena vatthun ti. |211 atha kho tassa gilånu- 
patthdkassa bhikkhuno etad ahosi: bhagavatå pafifiattam na 
auissitena vatthabban ti, ahañ о’ amhi nisssyskaraniyo, вувў 
са bbikkhu gilåno. kstbam nu kho mayá patipajjitabban ti. 
bhagavato etam attham årocesum. впијёпёші bhikkhave 
gilánupatthákena bhikkbunà nissayam slabbamånens 
yhoiyemünena anissitene vatthun ti. 181 tena kho pana 
samayene aññataro bhikkhu агайде viherati, tassa ca tasmim 
senüsane phåsu hoti. atha kho tassa bhikkhuno etad ahosi : 
bhagavatå pafifiattam na onissitena vatthabban ti, аһай c' 
amhi nisssyakaraniyo, araññe viharåmi, таућей ca imasmim 
senåsane pbåsu hoti. katham nu kho mayå patipajjitabban 
ti. bhagavato etam attham Årocesum.  anujáuámi bhi- 
kkhove áreffiakena bhikkhunà pbåsuvibåram salla- 
kkhentena nissayam alabhamánena enissitena vatthum 
увай patirüpo nissayadåyeko &gacchissati, tassa nissåya va- 
sissåmiti. ||41 73 || 


tena kho рапа samayens üyaesmato Mahåkessepassa 
upasampadåpekkho hoti, atha kho &yasmá Mabâkassapo 
åyasmato Anandasea santike dütam påhesi: &gaochatu 
Ånando imam anussåvensatiti. &yasmá Ánando evam Aha: 
náham ussahåmi therassa nåmam gahetum, garu me thero 


L % 1-76. 2.) MAHÅVAGGA. 93 


‘tL bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi bhi- 
kkhave gottena pi anussåvetun ti. |111 tena kho pans 
samayena &üyasmato Mahåkassapessa dve upasampadi- 
pekkbå honti, te vivedanti: aham pathamam upasampajjissá- 
mi, aham pathamam upasampajjissimiti. bbagavato etam 
attham Grocesum. anujdnimi bhikkhave dve ekånussåvane 
kátun ti. |2|; tena kho pane samayena sambaholånam the-- 
ránam upasampadåpekkhå honti, te vivadanti: abam patha- 
mam upasampajjissåmi, saham pathamam upasampajjissámtti. 
therå evam á&hamsu: handa mayam åvuso sabbeva ekå- 
nuseåvane karomå ‘ti  bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 
'anujánámi bhikkhave dve tayo ekånussåvane kátum, {ай 
ca kho ekena upajjhdyena, na tv eva nånupsjjhåyenå "ti. 
031741 


tena kho pana samayena åyasmå Kumårakassapo ga- 
bbbeviso upasampanno hoti. atha kbo åyasmato Kumåra- 
kassapasea etad shosi: bhagavati pafifiattam na Qnavieati- 
vasso puggalo upasampádetabbo "ti, ahaü o’ amhi gabbhaviso. 
upasampanno nu kho 'mhi na nu kho upasampanno "ti. bha- 
gavato etam attham årocesum. yam bhikkhave mátu ku- 
cchismim pathamam oittem uppanuam, pathamem viññánam 
pátabhütam, tadupådåye så 'v' assa jàti. anujdndmi bhi- 
kkhave gabbhavisam upasampådetun ti. |1117 811 


tena kho pana samayene upesampanná dissanti kutthikapi 
gandikApi kilåsikåpi sosikåpi apamáriküpi. bhagavato etam 
attham ürocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave upasampådentena 
tassa antaråyike dhamme pucchitum. evañ cs pane 
bhikkhave pucchitabbo: santi te evarüpà АЬААҺА kuttham 
gando kilåso soso apamáro, manusso 'si, purieo 'si, bhujisso 
"ei, anano 'si, na ‘si r&jebbato, anufifiåto ‘si m&tápitühi, pari- 
punnavisativasso 'si, paripupnan te pattacivarap, kimnåmo 
"ai, konámo te upajjbáyo "ti. |11 tens kho pana samayena 
bhikkhà ananusitthe upasampadåpekkhe antaråyike dhamme 
pucchanti. apasampadApekkhé vittbáyanti, шайкі honti, 
na sakkonti vissajjetum. bbagaveto etam attham årocesum. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave pathamam anusåsitvå pecchá antaråyi- 


94 MAHÄVAGGA. [T. 76. 3-8. 


ke dhamme pucchitan ti |211 tatth’ eva samghemajjhe anu- 
&üsanti, upasampadåpekkbå tath’ eva vittháyant, mankü 
honti, na sakkonti vissajjetum. bhagavato etam attham âro- 
cesum. enujånåmi bhikkhave ekamantam anusåsitvå samghe- 
majjhe antaråyike dhamme puochitum. evañ ca pana bhi- 
kkhave anusåsitabbo: pathamam upajjham gåhåpetabbo, 
upajjbam pgåbåpetvå pattactvaram åcikkhitabbam, ayan te 
petto, ayam samgbáti, ayam uttarüsango, ayam sntaravåsako, 
gaochs amumbi okáse tittbåbiti. |311 bålå avyatté anusá- 
santi, anusitthá upasampad&pekkhá vittháyanti, mankü honti, 
na sakkonti vissajjetum. bbagavato etam attham &rooeeum. 
na bhikkhave bålena avyattena anusåsitabbo. yo anuså- 
seyya, Apatti dukkatasse. — anujánámi bhikkhave vyattena 
bbikkhunå patibalena anusåsitun ti. [4] assmmatå snusá- 
santi. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. па bhikkbave 
asammatena anusåsitabbo. yo anusåseyya, Apatti dukkatasså 
‘ti. anujandmi bhikkhave sammatena anusåsitum. evañ ca 
pana bhikkhave sammannitabbo: attanå 'va attånam sam- 
mannitabbam parena và pero sammannitabbo.  kathaíl ca 
attanå 'va attánam eammannitabbam. vyattena bhikkhunà 
patibalena samgho füpetabbo: sunåta me bhante samgho. 
ittbannámo itthennámasss åyesmato upasampeddpekkho. 
yadi samgbhassa pattakallam, aham itthannámam snuså- 
seyyan ti, evam sttanå ”va attánam sammannitabbam. || 5 |J 
kathaü ca parena paro sammannitabbo. vyattena bhikkhu- 
Då patibelens samgho fi&petabbo: sunåtu me bhante samgho. 
itthann&mo itthennimesss åyasmato upasampad&pekkho. 
yadi samghassa pattakallam, itthannåmo itthannimam anu- 
sÁseyyà 'ti. evam parens paro sammaunitabbo. |J6|| tena 
eammatena bhikkhunà upasampadipekkho upasamkamitvé 
evam assa vacaniyo: sunasi itthannima. ayam te saccakålo 
bhåtakålo. yam jåtam tam eamghamajjhe puochante santam 
atthiti vattabbam, asantam n’ atthiti vattabbam. må kho 
vitthási, må kho menku sahosi. evan tam pucchissan ti: 
manti te evarüp& &b&dhá . . . konåmo te upajjhåyo "ti. 17] 
ekato Agacchanti. na ekato Agantabbam. anusšsskena patha- 
mataram ágantvá samgho flåpetabbo: sunåtu me bhante 
samgho. itthann&mo itthannámases Ayasmato upasampadá- 


I. T6. 8-77. 1.] MAHÅVAGGA. 95 


pekkho. anusittho so mayá. yadi samghesss pattakellam, 
itthannåmo AgaccheyyA 'ti. ågacchåbiti vattabbo. ekamsam 
uttarüsangam kåråpetvå bhikkhünam påde vandåpetvå ukku- 
tikam nisidåpetvå afijalim pagganhåpetvå upassmpadam yå- 
cápetabbo: samgham bbante upasampadam yåcåmi, ullum- 
patu mam bhante samgho anukempam upådåye, dutiyam рі 
bhante . . . , tatiyam рі bhante samgham upasampadam yá- 
cåmi, ullumpatu mam bhente samgho anukempam upådåyå 
"ti. 181 vysttena bhikkhuná patibalena samgho fiåpetabbo: 
sunita me bhante samgho. ayam itthannåmo itthann&massa 
&yasmato upasampadApekkho. yadi samghassa pattakallam, 
aham itthennåmem antaråyike dhamme pucoheyyan ti, eu- 
pasi itthanndma. ayam te saccakålo bhütakálo. yam játam 
tam pucchåmi. santam atthiti vattabbam, asantam n’ atthi- 
ti vattabbam. santi te evarüp& åbådbå . . . konåmo te 
upajjbayo "ti. 191 vyattena bhikkhun& pațibalena eamgho 
fiåpetabbo: sunåtu me bhante samgho. ayam ittbannåmo 
itthannåmasss &yasmato upasampadápekkho, parisuddbo an- 
taråyikehi dhammehi, paripunn’ assa pattactvaram. itthan- 
n&mo samgham upasampadam yhcati itthannåmens upajjha- 
yena. yadi samghassa pattakallam, samgho ittbannåmam 
upasampådeyye itthannåmena opsjjbåyene. esd flatti. 101 
sanåtu me bhante samgho. ayam itthannåmo ittbannåmasm 
&yssmato upasampadüpekkho, parisuddho antaråyikehi dba- 
mmehi, paripunp' assa pattacivaram. itthann&mo samgham 
upasampadam yåcati itthannåmens upejjbåyene. samgho 
itthannámam upasampådeti ittbapnåmens upsjjhåyene. yass- 
&yumnato khamati itthanndmassa upasampadå itthannåme- 
na upajjháyens, so tanh’ assa, yassa па kkhamati, so bhå- 
seyyu. |11] dutiyam pi etam attham vedåmi: supátu me 

. . tatiyam pi etam attham vedåmi: sunåtu me. . . yasss 
na kkhamati, во bhaseyye. upasampanno samghens itthan- 
nåmo itthannåmens upajjháyena.  khamati samghama, ta- 
små tunbi, evam etam dbårayåmiti. 1121761 upasemps- 
dákammem nitthitam. 


tåvad eva ohåyå metabbå, utupamånam årikkhi- 
tabbam, divasabhégo Acikkhitabbo, samgiti Acikkhi- 


96 MAHAVAGGA. 1. 77. 1-78. 3. 


tabbå, cattåro nissayé &cikkhitabbà: pindiyålopabho- 
jena nissåya pabbejjå, tattha te yavajivam ussåho kara- 
niyo, atirekalábho samghebbettam uddesabhattam nimanta- 
nam selákebhettam pakkhikam upossthikam p&tipedikam. 
pamesukülacivaram nissåya pebbajj&, tattha te yåvajivem 
usstho karapiyo. atirekalábho khomam kappásikam koso- 
yyam kambalam såpam bhangam. rukkhamülasenáse- 
nam nissåya pabbajjá, tattba te yávajivam ussåho karaniyo. 
atirekalabho vibåro addhayogo påsådo hammiyam gubå. 
pütimuttabhesajjam nissåya pabbejjå, tattha te yávaji- 
vam ussåho karaniyo. atirekalåbbo sappi nevanitam telam 
madhu phápitan ti. |11771 cattåro nissayå nitthità. 


tena kho pana samayena bhikkhü afifiataram bhikkhum 
upasampådetvå ekakam obåye pakkamimsu. во pacchå eka- 
ko Agacchanto antarå magge purånadutiyikåye samagacchi. 
så evam dha: kim dani pabbajito ‘siti. Аша pabbajito ’mhi- 
ti. dullabbo kho pabbajitånam methuno dhammo, ehi me- 
опет dhammam patisevå 'ti. so tasså methunam dham- 
mam patisevitvå cirena ågamåsi. bhikkbû evam åbamsu: 
kissa tvam Avuso evam ciram akásiti. ||1|| atha kho so bhi- 
kkhu bhikkhünam etam attbam årocesi. bbikkht bhaga- 
vato etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave upesam- 
pádetvà dutiyam dåtum cattåri ca akeraniyåni åci- 
kkhitum: upasampannene bhikkhund methuno dhammo 
na patisevitabbo antamaso tiracchánagatáya pi. yo bhikkhu 
methunam dhammam patisevati, assamano hoti asakyaputti- 
уо. seyyathåpi пата puriso sisacohinno abhabbo tena sari~ 
rabandhanena jivitum, evam eva bhikkhu methunam dham- 
mam  patisevitvà assamano hoti easkyaputtiyo, tam te 
yåvejivam akarapiyam. |211 upasampannene bhikkhun& 
adinnam theyyasamkbátam ns ådåtebbam antamaso tipa- 
salåkem upådåya. yo bhikkhu pádam vá pådåraham và 
'atirekapádam và adinnam theyyasamkhütam ådiysti, assa- 
mano hoti asakyaputtiyo. seyyathåpi пёша pandupalåso 
bandhanå pemutto abhabbo baritattåya, evam eva bhikkhu 
pådam vå püdársham và stirekspådam vå adinnam theyya- 
samkbåtam ådiyitvå assamano hoti asskyaputtiyo, tam te 


I. 78. 3-79. 3.) MAHÅVAGGA. 97 


yåvsjivam akaraniyam. |31 upasampannens bhikkhunå 
вайсїоса påno jivitå no voropetabbo antamaso kuntha- 
kipillikam upådåye. yo bhikkhu вайсісса manussaviggaham 
jività voropeti antamaso gabbhapåtanam upådåye, asnamano 
hoti esakyaputtiyo. seyyathapi nåme puthusilA dvedhá 
bhinné appatisandhiká hoti, evam eva bhikkhu sañcicca ma- 
nussaviggabam jivitå voropetvá assamano hoti asakyaputtiyo, 
tam te yüvajivam akarantyam. ||4|| upasampannena bhi- 
kkhonA uttarimanussadhammo na ullapitabbo anta- 
maso вийїййрїге abhiramámiti. yo bbikkhu påpiccho icchå- 
pekato esantam abhütam uttarimenussadbammam ullepati 
jh&nam vå vimokkham vá samådhim vá samápettim vå 
magga vå phalam va, assamano hoti asakyaputtiyo. seyya- 
арі nåma tàlo matthakacchinno abhabbo punavirü]hiyA, 
evam eva bhikkhu рёріссћо icchåpakato asantam abhütam 
uttarimanusssdhemmam ullapitvå assamano hoti asakyeputti- 
yo, tam te yavajtvam akarapfyan ti. ||5|| 
oattåri ekaraniyåni nitthitani. 1781 


tena kho pana samayena afifiataro bhikkhu &pattiyb ada- 
ssane ukkbittako vibbhami, so puna paccAgantvå bhikkhü 
upesampadam yåci. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. idha 
pana bhikkhave bhikkhu ápettiy& adamane ukkhittako vi- 
bbhamati, во puna paocågantvå bhikkhQ upasampadam yå- 
сай. eo evam assa vacaniyo: paseissaai tayp åpettin ti. sao' 
áham passissimiti pabbåjetubbo, sac’ Aham na passisså- 
miti na pabbájetabbo. |11 pabbåjetvå vattabbo passissasi 
tam bpsttin ti. sac’ Gham pessissAmiti upasampådetabbo, 
вас’ Aham na passissåmiti na upesampådetabbo. upasampå- 
detvå vattabbo passissasi tam &pattin ti. sac’ üham passi- 
esimiti osåretabbo, sac’ Aham na pessissåmiti na osåretabbo. 
osåretvå vattabbo passasi tam Apattin ti. sace passati, ico 
etam kusalam, no oe passati, labbhamåvåye såmaggiyå puna 
ukkhipitabbo, alabbhamånåya såmsggiyå anåpatti sambhoge 
samvåse. |121 idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu åpettiyå appati- 
kamme ukkhittako vibbbamati, so puna paccågantvå bhi- 
kkhå upasampadam yåcati. во evam asss vacantyo: patika- 
Fiesasi tam åpettin ti. sso’ Abam patikariesdmiti pabbáje- 

7 


YOL. ш. 


M 


98 MAHÅVAGGA. (I. 79. 3-4. 


tabbo, вас’ âham na patikariss&miti na pabbåjetabbo. pa- 
bbåjetvå vattabbo patikarissesi tam Apattin ti. sac’ аш 
patikarissámiti upasampådetabbo, sac’ åham na patikarissá- 
miti na upasampádetabbo. upassmpådetvå vattabbo patike- 
rissasi tam ápattin ti. sac’ Aham patikariasAmiti osåretabbo, 
вво’ Gham na petikarissámiti na osåretabbo. osåretvå va- 
ttabbo petikarohi tam åpattin ti. sace patikaroti, ico etam 
kusalam, no ce patikaroti, labbhamán&ya såmaggiyå puna 
ukkhipitabbo, alsbbhamånåya såmaggiyå anåpatti sambhoge 
samvåse. |131 idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu påpikåya 
ditthiy& appetinissagge ukkhittako vibbhamati, so puna paccá- 
gantvå bhikkhü upasampadam yücati. so evam ass våca- 
niyo: patinissajjissesi tam pápikam ditthin ti sac’ Aham 
patinissajjiss&ámiti pabbåjetabbo, sac’ ёћа na patiniasajjiseá- 
miti na pabbåjetabbo. —pabbåjetvå vattabbo patinissajjiasa- 
ві tam påpikam ditthin ti. вао’ аһа patinissajjissimiti 
upasasmpådotabbo, sac’ &ham па petinissajjiaámiti na 
upasampådetabbo. upasampådetvå vattabbo patinissajjissa- 
ві tam pApikem ditthin ti. ac’ &bam patinisaajjissAmiti 
osåretabbo, sac’ åbam na patinisssjjiesåmiti na osåretabbo. 
osåretvå vattabbo patinissajjåhi tam påpikam dittbin 
ti. saoe petinisssjjati, ico etam kusalam, no oe patinissa- 
jjati, labbhamánüya eåmaggiyå puna ukkhipitabbo, ala- 
bbhamånåye eåmaggiyå anåpetti sambhoge samvåse ”ti. 
141791 
Mahékhandhako pathamo. 


vinsyambi mahatthesu pesalAnam sukhåvahe 
niggahe са påpiccbånam lajjinam paggahesu сз 
såaanådbårane o'eva sabbailiujinagocare 
anafiflavisaye kheme supafifiatte asamsayel| 
khandhake vinaye с’ eva parivåre са mátike 
yathatthakéri kusalo patipajjati yoniso.| 
уо gavam na vijånåti na so rakkhati goganam, 
-evam silam ajånanto kim so rakkheyya samvaram.| 
pamutthamhi ca suttante abbidhamme ca tåvade 


5 


10 


15 


20 


MAHAVAGGA. 99 


vinaye avinatthamhi puna titthati såsanam.| 

tasmå samgashagahetu uddånam anupubbaso 
pevakkhámi yatháiüApnam, sunátha mama bhásato.| 
vetthu nidánam åpettf nayå peyyålam eva ca 
dukkaram tam asesetam, nayato tam viján&tbA 'ti.| 


bodhi ca, Ráj&ystanam, Ajapålo, Sehampeti 

Brahmå, Alåro, Uddako, bhikkhü ca, Upako isi, 
Kondafifio, Veppo, Bhaddiyo, Mahånåmo ca, Assaji, 
Yaso, cattdro, раййдзат, eabbe, pesesi so, diså,| 
vatthum, Магећі, timså ca, Uruvelam, tayo jati, 
agyågåram, Mahåråjå, Sakko, Brahmå ca, kevalA,| 
pamsakülam, pokkharanf, silå ca, kakudho, silå, 
jembu, ambo ca, Amalako, pårioohattspuppham åbari,| 
phåliyantu, ujjalantu, vijjbåyantu ca Kassapa, 
nimujjanti, mukhi, megho, Gay&, latthi ca, Mågadho,| 
Upatisso, Kolito ca, abhififiaté ca, pabbajjam, 
dunnivatthå, panåmanå, kiso lükho ca bråhmano,| 
anácáram &carati, udaram, månevo, gano, 

vassam, bálehi, pakkento, dass vassåni, nissayo,| 

na vattanti, pap&metum, ЪВІА, passaddhi, pafica, cha, 
yo so айдо ca, naggo ca, acchinnam, jati, Såkiyo,| 
Magadhesu pafica Abådhå, eko, coro са anguli, 
Mågadho ca anuiifidsi, kårå, likhi, kas&hato,| 
lakkhapé, ip&, dåso ca, Bhanduko, Upåli, ahi, 
saddhakulam, Kendako са, åhundarikam eva ca,| 
vatthumhi, dárako, sikkhá, vibaranti ca, kim nu kho, 
sabbam, mukham, upajjháye, apalajana-Kandako,| 
pandako, theyya-pakkanto, ahi ca, mátari, pitå, 
erahsnta-bhikkhuni, bhedá, ruhirena ca, vyafijenam,| 
anupejjb4ya—samghens, gana-pandakå-"pattako, 
ecivaram, tadubbayam, yácitena pi ye tayo,| 

bhatth&, pada, hatthapådå, kapná, nåså, tadubhayam, 
айгай, aja-kandaram, phapam, khujjafi са, vamanam,| 
galagandi, lakkhanå о’ eva, kaså, likhita-etpadi, t" ^ 
pápe-perisadüsaii ca, kAnam, kupim tath’ eva ca, „9'· ) 


«АУ 


100 MAHAVAGGA. 


khafija-pakkhahatafi c' eva, sacchinnairiy&patham, 
jarándha-m üga-badhiram, endhamügafi са yam tahim,| 
andhabadhiram yam vuttam, mügabadhiram eva ca, 
andhamügabedhirail ca, ајајјїпай ca nissayam,| 
vatthabbaii ca, kataddhánam, yåcamånena, pekkhaná, 
25 &gacchantam, vivadenti, ekupajjbåyena, Kassapo,| 
dissanti upasampannå åbådhehi ca pilitå, 
ananusittbå vittháyanti, tatth’ eva anus&san&,| 
samghe pi ca, atho bålo, asammato ca, ekato, 
ullumpatupasampadå, nissayo, ekako, tayo 'ti.| 
imamhi khandhake vatthu ekasatam båsattati.| 


Mahákhandhake uddånem nitthitam pathamam. 


MAHAVAGGA. 


II. 


Tena вашеуепе buddho bhagavå Råjagahe vibarati 
Gijjheküte pabbate. tena kho pana samayena añña- 
titthiyá peribbájekà cåtnddase pannarase atthamiyé ca 
pekkbassa sannipetitvé dhammam bhåsenti. te manusså 
upasamkamanti dbammasavanüya. te labbanti aññetitthi- 
yesu paribbåjakesu pemam, labbanti pasådam, labhanti аййа- 
titthiyå paribbåjakå pakkham. ||!| atha kho таййо Mà- 
gadhassa Seniyassa Bimbisårassa rahogatassa pati- 
sallinassa evam cetaso parivitskko udapådi: etarabi kho 
afifiatitthiyé peribbåjakå cåtuddase pannarase atthamiyå ca 
pekkhassa sannipetitvå dhammam bbåsanti. te manusså 
upasamkamanti dhammesavanåye. te labhanti afiflatittbi- 
yesu peribbåjakesu pemam, labhanti pasådam, labhanti аййа- 
titthiyé paribb4jaké pakkham. yam пфпа ayyåpi cåtuddase 
pannarase atthamiy& ca pakkhassa sannipateyyun ti. ||2|| 
atha kho rájà Mágadho Seniyo Bimbisåro yena bhagava 
ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivådetvå 
ekamantam nistdi. ekamantam nisinno kho råjå Mågadho 
Seniyo Bimbisåro bhagavantam etad avoca: idba mayham 
bhante rahogatassa patisallinassa evam cetaso parivitakko 
udspådi : etarahi kho aññatitthiyå peribbåjakå . . . attha- 
miyå ca pakkhassa sannipateyyun ti. sådbu bhante ayyApi 
cátuddase pannarase atthamiyà ca pakkhassa eannipateyyun 
ti. |3]| atha kho bbagavå råjånam Mågadham Seniyam 
Bimbisåram dhammiyå kathåye sandassesi samådapesi sam- 
uttejesi sampahamsesi. atha kho råjå Mågadho Seniyo 
Bimbisåro bhagavaté dhammiy& kathåya sandassito samåda- 
pito samuttejito ssmpahamsito utthåyåsanå bhagavantam 


102 MAHÁYAGOA. [II. 1. 4-3. 3. 


abhivådetvå padakkhipam ketvå pakkåmi. atha kho bhaga- 
và etasmim nidáne etasmim pakarane dhammikatham katvA 
bhikkhü &mantesi: anujánümi bhikkhave oåtuddase pa- 
nnarase atthamiyå oa pakkhasss sannipatitun ti. 


041011 


tena kho рапа samayena bhikkhü bhagavetå anufifiåtam 
cåtuddase pannarase atthamiyå ca pakkhassa sannipatitun ti 
te cåtuddase pannarase atthamiyå ca pakkbassa sannipatitvå 
ещ! nisidenti. te manusså upasamkamanti dbammasavanå- 
ya. te ujjb&yanti kbiyanti vipácenti: katham hi nåme 
aamanå Sakyaputtiyé cAtuddase pannarase atthamiyå ca pa- 
kkhassa sannipatitvà tunht nisidissanti seyyatbåpi migasd- 
karå. nanu náms sannipatitebi dhammo bbåsitabbo "ti. 
assosum kho bhikkhü tesam manussånam ujjbåyantånam 
khiyantánam vipåcentånam. atha kho te bhikkhà bhaga- 
vato etam attham årocesum. atha kho bbagavå etasmim 
nidåne etasmim ракагађе dhammikatham katvá bhikkhü 
&mantesi : enuján&mi bhikkhave cátuddase раппатале attha- 
miy& ca pakkhassa sannipetitvå dhammam bhásitun 
ti. HIB 


atha kho bhagavato rahogatasea petisallinassa evam cotaso 
perivitakko udapådi : yam nün&ham yåni maya bhikkhünam 
pefifiattáni sikkhåpadåni táni nesam påtimokkbuddesam enu- 
jåneyyam, so nesam bhavissati uposathakamman ti. |1 atha 
kho bhegavå såyenhasamayam petisallàn& vutthito etasmim 
nidåne etasmim pekerape dhammikatham Кабуд bhikkhd 
&meptesi: idha mayham bhikkbave rshogatassa patisalli- 
пазва evam cetaso parivitakko udapådi: yam nüp&ham yåni 
meyå bhikkhünam pefiliattáni sikkbåpadåni {Апі nesam påti- 
mokkhuddesam anujáneyyam, so nesam bhavissati oposatha- 
kamman ti. anujinimi bhikkhave patimokkham uddisi- 
tum. |121 evañ ca pana bhikkhave uddisitabbam : vyattena 
bhikkbunå patibalena samgho flåpetabbo : supAtu me bhsnte 
samgho. ajj’ uposatho pannaraso. yadi samgbassa patta- 
kallam, samgho uposatbam kareyya påtimokkham uddi- 
seyya. kim samghassa pubbekiocam pårisuddhim &yasmanto 


II. 8. 8-6.) MAHÁYAGGA. 103 


årocetha. pátimokkham uddisimámi, tam sabbeva santé aå- 
dhukam supoma manasikaroms. yassa aiyà åpatti, so Avi- 
kareyya, asantiyå åpettiyå tunbi bhavitabbam, tunhibbåvene 
kho panåyasmante parisuddbå ’ti vedissåmi. yetbå kho pans 
paccekaputthasea veyyåkaranam hoti, evam eva evaråpåye 
parisdya yåvatatiyam anussåvitam hoti. yo pana bbikkhu 
yåvatatiyam snussåviyamåne saramåno santim Apattim nà- 
vikareyye, sampsjånamusåvåd' assa hoti. sampsjånamuså- 
vådo kho panåyssmsuto antaråyiko dhammo vutto bhagavatå. 
taømå saramAnena bhikkhuná Apannena visuddhápekkhena 
santi Apatti åvikåtsbbå, åvikatå hi ‘ssa phåsu hotiti. ||3]J 
påtimokkhan ti ådim etam, mukham etam, pamukham etam 
kusalånsm dhammanam, tene vuccati påtimokkhan ti. &ya- 
emanto 'ti piyavacanam etam, garuvacanam etam, ssgárava- 
sappetissádhivacanam etam âyasmanto "ti. uddisissåmiti 
åcikkhissåmi desessåmi paílüdpeesàmi pattbapessåmi viva- 
risámi vibbsjissåmi uttånikarissåmi paküseesámi. tan ti 
påtimokkbam vuccati. sabbeva santé ’ti yåvatikå taseá pa- 
risáya therå ca navå ca majjhimå ca, ete vuccanti sabbeva 
sant ‘ti. sådhukam supomá ’ti atthikatvà manasikatvå 
sabbam сеќава samann&haráms. manasikaromå 'ti ekagga- 
città avikkbittacittaé avisåhetscittå pisåmema. |4|| yasa 
siyà åpattiti therassa vA navasea và majjhimasss và райса- 
nnam vá åpettikkhandbånam aññatarå ápatti sattannam vñ 
ápattikkhendhánam afiflatarA Apatti. so Avikareyyé 'ti so 
deseyya, so vivareyya, so uttånikareyya, so pakåseyya sam- 
ghamejjhe vå gapamajjhe vå ekapuggale vå. asanti ойша 
åpatti anajjbåpannå vá hoti &pejjitvà vå vutthitå. tunhi 
bhavitabban ti adhivásetsbbam, na vyåbåtabbam. parisu- 
ddb& 'ti vedissàmiti jånissåmi dhåressåmi. ||5|| yatha kho 
репа pacoekaputthassa veyyåkaranam hotiti yathi ekena eko 
puttho vyAkereyya, ета eva {авай parisåya jånitabbam mam 
pucchatiti.  evaråpå náma pariså bhikkhuperisá vuccati. 
yåvatatiyam anussávitam hotiti sakim pi anumåvitam hoti 
dutiyam pi anussávitam hoti tatiyam pi anussåvitam hoti, 
saramåno "і jånamåno eañjânamâno. sant! nåma ápatti 
sjjbåpannå và hoti åpajjitvå vå svutthit&. nåvikareyyå 'ti 
na deseyya na vivareyya na uttünikereyya na pakáseyya 


104 MAHÅVAGGA. II. 3. 6-8. 1. 


samghamajjhe vá gansmajjhe vå ekapuggale vå. ||6]| sampa- 
jånamusåvåd' assa hotiti, sampajánamusávádo kim hoti. 
dukkatem hoti, antaråyiko dhammo vutto bhagavatå "ti. 
kima antaráyiko. pathamassa jhånessa adhigamáya anta- 
råyiko, dutiyessa jbånassa adhigamåys antarüyiko, tati- 
yasss jbånassa adbigamåye antaråyiko, catutthass jhbå- 
nassa adhigamáya entarfyiko, jhánánam vimokkhánam sam- 
&dhinam samåpattinem nekkhammánam npisssrapånam pa- 
vivekànam kusalaénum dhammánam adbigamåys antaråyiko. 
tasmå ’ti tamkåranå. saramánená 'ti jånamånens ssfljåna- 
månens. visuddbåpekkhenå ”ti vutthåtukåmena visujjbitu- 
kåmena. ||7|| santi nàma ápatti ajjhåpannå vA hoti Apajjitva 
và avutthit& — &vikütebbà ’ti åvikåtabbå samghamsjjhe và 
ganamajjhe và ekapuggale vå. åviketå hi 'ssa pháeu hotiti, 
Маза pbåsu hoti. pethamassa jháuasss adbigamåye phásu 
hoti, dutiyasss jhánassa adhigamaya pháeu hoti, tatiyassa 
jbånassa adhigamáya pháeu hoti, catutthassa jhAnassa adhi- 
gamåys pbåsu hoti, jhånånam vimokkhånam sam&ádhinam 
samåpattinem nekkhammånam nissarapáónam pavivekánam 
kusalánarn dhemmánam edhigamåys phasu hotiti. [18181 


tene kho pana eamayena bhikkhü bhaguvatá påtimokkh- 
uddeso anufifidto 'ti devasikam påtimokkham uddisanti. bha- 
gavato etam attham årocesum. na bhikkhave devasikam 
påtimokkham uddisitabbam. yo uddiseyya, üpatti dukka- 
tassa. anvjånåmi bhikkhave uposathe patimokkham 
uddieitun ti. |11 tena kho pana samayens bhikkhü bha- 
gavatå uposathe pátimokkhuddeso anvilfiåto 'ti pakkhassa 
tikkhattum påtimokkham uddisanti cátuddase pannarase 
attbamiyå ca pakkbasss. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 
na bhikkhave pakkhassa tikkhattum pátimokkham uddisi- 
tabbam. yo uddiseyya, åpatti dukkatasæ. anuj&n&mi bhi- 
kkhave sakim pakkhassa cátuddase và pannarase và 
påtimokkbam uddisitun ti. 1211411 


tena kho pana samsyens chabbaggiyå bhikkhü yathå- 
perisáya påtimokkkem  uddisanti sakåya-sekåye perisåye. 
bhagavato etam attham årocesum. па bhikkhave yathåpa- 


IT. b. 1-6.) MAHÅVAGGA. 105 


risåya påtimokkham uddisitabbam sakåys-sakåye perisåye. 
yo uddiseyyn, Apatti dukkataea. anujånåmi bhikkhave sam- 
sggånam upossthakamman ti. |11 atha kho bhi- 
kkhünam etad ahosi: bhagavaté paññattam samaggánam 
uposathakamman ti. kittåvatå nu kho såmaggi hoti, yåvatå 
ekåvåso udáhu sabbå pathaviti. bhagavato etam attham åro- 
cesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave ettåvatå sAmaggt yåvatå ok&- 
vaso 'ti.||2i| tena kho pana samayena åyesmå Mahákappino 
Rájagahe viharati Maddakucchiemim migadáye. atha 
kho åyasmato Mabåkappinessa rehogatassa patisallinassa 
evam oetaso perivitakko udapådi: gaccheyyam vdham upo- 
satham па vå gacoheyyam, gaccheyyam vå samghakammam 
na vå gaccheyyam, atha khv åbam visuddho paramaya vi- 
suddhiy& 'ti. [[3(| atha kho bhagavå Ayasmato Mahákappi- 
nassa cetaså cetoparivitakkam айййуа seyyathåpi nåma bala- 
vA puriso sammifljitam vå båbam pasåreyya pasåritam vå 
båbam sammifljeyya, evam eva Gijjhaküte pabbate antarabi- 
to Meddakucchismim migadåye Ayasmato Mshåksppinasss 
pamukhe påturahosi. nietdi bhagavå pafiflatte dsane, &yas- 
mápi kho Mahåkappino bhagavantam ebhivüdetvà ekamantam 
nisidi. |14! ekamantam nisinnam kho &yasmantam Mabå- 
ksppinam bhagavá etad avoca: nanu te Kappina rahoga- 
tama patisallinassa evam cetaso parivitakko udapádi : gacohe- 
yyam våham uposatham na vå gaccheyyam, gaccheyyam và 
samghakammam na vå gaccheyyam, atha khv åbam vi- 
suddho paramáya visuddhiyå "ti. evam bhante. tumhe oo 
bråhmanå uposatham па sakkarissatha, ne garukarissathe, na 
månessatha, na påjessatha, atha ko carahi uposatham sakka- 
risati garukariesati månessati püjessati. gaccba tvam bråh- 
mana uposatham, må no agamási, gacoh’ eva samgha- 
kammam, må no egamásiti. evam bhante 'ti kho Ayasma 
Meahékappino bhagsvato paccassosi. ||| atha kho bhagavå 
Ayasmantam Mahakappinam dhammiy& katbåye sandassetvå 
samådepetvå samuttejetvå sampabamsetvå seyyathápi náma 
balavå puriso sammifijitam vå båham pasåreyyn pasáritam vA 
båham sammifljeyya, evam eva Meddskucchismim migadåye 
åyasmato Mahfkeppinasss pamukhe antarahito Gijjhaküte 
pabbate påturahosi. [|6 (5 || 


106 MAHÅVAGGA. UI. 8. 1-8. 1. 


atha kho bhikkhünam etad ahosi: bhagavetå pafifiattam 
ettåvatå sámaggi yåvatå ekåvåso "ti. kittåvatå nu kho ekAváso 
hotiti. bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. anujånåmi bhikkha- 
ve simam sammannitum. evafica pana bhikkhave sam- 
mannitabbå : pathamam nimittà kittetabbå, pabbatanimi- 
ttam, pás&nanimittam, vananimittam, rukkhanimittam, ma- 
gganimittam, vammikenimittam, nadinimittam, udakanimi- 
ttam. nimitte kittetvå vyattena bhikkhuné patibalena samgho 
fiåpetabbo : supåtu me bhante samgho.  yüvatà samantå 
nimitté kittilà, yadi samghassa pattakallam, eamgho etehi 
nimittebi simam sasmmanneyya ssmånasamvåsam ekuposa- 
tham. eså fistti. |11 sunátu me bhante samgho. yåvatå 
samantá nimittå kittitå, samgho etehi nimittehi simam sam- 
шаппай samånasamvåsam ekuposatham. yassdyasmato 
khamati etehi nimittehi eimáya sammuti saminasamvisiya 
ekuposathåya, ao tunh’ assa, yassa na kkhamati, so bhüseyya. 
sammat4 simå samghena etehi nimittehi samånssamvåså eku- 
posatbå. khamati samghassa, tasmå tunbi, evam etam dhé- 
rayåmiti. |21611 


tena kho pana samayens ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü bhaga- 
vatå simásammuti anufifiktå 'ti atimahatiyo simåyo samma- 
nnanti catuyojanikåpi peñcayojanikápi cheyojanikåpi. bhi- 
kkhü oposatham &gacchantà uddissamåne pi påtimokkhe 
&gacchanti udditthamatte pi ågacchanti antarápi perivasanti. 
bhagavato etam attham árocesum. na bhikkhave atimahati 
simå sammannitabbå catuyojanikå vá paficayojaniké và oha- 
yojanikå vå. yo semmanneyye, Apatti dukkatasss. — anujá- 
nami bhikkhave tiyojanaparamam simam sammanni- 
tun ti. 1l tena kho pana eamayena ohabbaggiyå bhi- 
ЕК0 nadipáram simam sammannanti. uposatham Agaochantå 
bhikkhd pi vuyhanti pettåpi vuyhanti cfvaråni pi vuyhanti. 
bhagavato etam attham årocesum. пе bhikkhave nadipårå 
stmå sammannitabbå. уо sammanneyys, åpatti dukkatassa. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave yatth' assa dhuvanåvå vå dhuvasetu 
va, evarüpam nadipáram simam eammannitun ti. 1217 I| 


tena kho pana samayena bbikkhå anuperiveniyam páti- 


IL 8. 1-9. 1] MAHÁVAGGA. 107 


mokkham uddisanti ssamketens. ågantukå bhikkhü па 
jånanti kattha vå ajj’ nposatho kariyissatiti. — bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. na bhikkhave anupariveniyam på- 
timokkham uddisitabbam asamketena, yo uddiseyya, åpatti 
dukkatasss. enujånåmi bhikkhave ^uposethágáram sam- 
manpitvå uposatham kátux yam samgho åksökhati vibárem 
và addhayogam vå påsådam vå hammiyam vå gubam và. 
evañ ca pana bhikkhave sammannitabbam : ||1|| vyattens 
bhikkhunå petibalena samgho fiápetabbo : supátu me bhante 
samgho. yadi samghassa pattakallam, samgho itthannámam 
vihárem uposathégéram sammanneyya. esd ñatti. eunÁtu 
me bhanto samgho. samgho itthannimam viháram upoea- 
thågåram sammannati. yassåyesmato khamati itthanná- 
massa vihürassa uposathågårama sammati, so tunh’ assa, 
yasaa na kkhamati, so bháseyya. sammato samghena itthan- 
n&mo vibáro uposathdgiram. khamati eamghassa, tesmå 
tunbi, evam etam dhårayåmiti. ||2|| tena kho pana samaye- 
ne añiñatarasmim ñvñse dve uposathågåråni sammatáni honti. 
bhikkhû ubbsysttha sannipatanti idha uposstho kariyissati 
idha uposatho kariyissatiti. bhagavato etam attham arocesum. 
ns bhikkhave ekasmim дудзе dve uposathågåråni samman- 
nitabbéni уо eammanneyys, Apatti dukkatasse. anuvjånåmi 
bhikkhave ekam samübanitv& ekattha uposatham kâtam, 
131 evañ ca pana bhikkhave samübantabbam : vyattena bhi- 
kkbunå petibslene eamgho flåpetabbo: supátu me bhante 
samgho. yadi samghasea pattakallam, samgho itthannimam 
uposathågåram samühaneyya. esd natti. suflåtu me bhante 
samgho. samgho itthannåmam upoeathágáram samfihanati. 
yassåyasmato khamati itthanndmassa uposathågårasss sam- 
uggbåto, so tanh’ ама, yasa na kkbameti, so bbåseyya. 
samibatam samghene itthanndmam uposathügáram. kha- 
mati samghasss, tasmá tuphi, evam etam dbårsyåmtti. || 4 || 8 || 


tena kho pana samayena ailüstarasmim åvåse atikhudda- 
kam uposathágáram sammatam hoti. tadah’ uposathe mahå 
bhikkhusamgho sannipatito hoti. bhikkhü asammatåya bhå- 
miyå nisinná pátimokkham assosum. stha kho tesam bhi- 
kkhúnam etad ahosi: bhagavatà pafiflattam uposatbågåram 


108 MAHAVAGGA. [11.9. 1-11. 1. 


sammannitvá uposatho kåtabbo ‘ti, mayail ca asammatAya 
bhümiy& nisinná pátimokkham assosumbé. kato nu kho 
amhåkam uposatho akato nu kho 'ti. bhagavato etam attham 
Árocesum. sammatáya vå bhikkhave bhimiyé nisinnå asam- 
matáya vå, yato pátimokkham sunåti, kato 'v' ase’ upo- 
satho. 111 tena hi bhikkhave samgho yévamahantam upo- 
sathapamukham &kankhati, tivamahantam uposathapa- 
mukham sammannatu. evañ ca pana bhikkhave sammanni- 
tabbam: pathamam nimittå kittetabbå. nimitte kittetvå 
vyattena bbikkhunå patibalena samgho fiåpetabbo: supétu 
me bbante samgho. yåvatå samanté nimittå kittitå, yadi sam- 
ghassa pattakallam, samgho etehi nimittehi uposathapamu- 
kham ssmmanneyya. eså natti. sunåtu me bhante samgho. 
yåvatå samantå nimittå kittitå, samgho etehi nimittehi upo- 
sathapamukham sammannsti. yassáyasmato khamati etehi 
nimittehi uposathapamukhasaa sammuti, so tunh' assa, yassa 
na kkhamati, so bhåseyya. sammatam samghens etehi ni- 
mittebi uposathapamukham. khemati samghassa, tasmå 
tunht, evam etam dhérayamiti. |29 Il 


tena kho pana samayena afifiatarasmim åvåse tadah’ upo- 
sathe navakå bhikkbü pethamateram sannipetitvå na táva 
thera Agacchantiti pakkamimau. upoeatho vikAle ahosi. bha- 
gavato etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave tadah’ 
uposathe therehi bhikkhühi pethamataram sannipa- 
titan ti. 11110 


teva kho pana samayena Råjagahe sambahulå Avåså sa- 
mánasimá honti. tattha bhikkhü vivadanti amhAkam &váse 
uposatho kariyatu ambákam åvåse uposatho kariyatü ’ti. 
bhagavato etam attham árocesum. idha pana bhikkhave 
sambebulå åvåså samånasimå honti, tattba bhikkhü vivadanti 
amhákam åvåse uposatho kariyatu amhåkam åvåse uposatho 
keriyetü 'ti. tehi bhikkhave bhikkhühi sabbeh' eva eka- 
jjhem sannipatitvå uposatho kåtabbo, yattha vá pana 
thero bhikkhu vibarati tattha sannipatitvå uposatho kåtsbbo. 
na tv eva vaggena satnghena uposatho kátabbo. yo kmreyya, 
patti dukkataasA "ti. [1 [111 


1L 18 14.) MAHÅVAGGA. 109 


tena kho рапа samayena åyesmå Mehåkassspo Andha- 
kevindå Råjagahem uposatham ågacchanto antará magge 
nadim taranto manam vulbo ahosi, civaráni ’saa alláni. bhi- 
kkhü áyasmantam Mahákassapam etad avocum: kissa te 
Avuso civaráni allániti. idháham åvuso Andhakavindé Rája- 
geham uposatham Agacchanto antará magge nadim taranto 
man’ ambi vujho, tena me civaråni ellåniti. bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. yñ så bhikkhave samghena simá 
sammatå samånesamvåså ekuposathå, samgho tam simam 
ticivarena avippavásam sammannatu. |11 evañ ca 
pena bhikkhave sammennitabbé: vyattene bbikkhunå pati- 
balona samgho fiápetabbo: sunåtu me bhante samgho. ya 
så samghena simá sammalå samånasamvåså ekupossthå, yadi 
eamghasea pattakallam, samgho tam simam tiofvarena avi- 
ppevüsam sammanneyya. esi fiatti. sanåtu me bhante 
samgho. yñ så samghena simå sammatå samånasamvåså 
ekuposathå, eamgho tam simam ticivarena avippavåsam sam- 
mennati. yassåyasmato khamati otised simåye ticivarena 
avippavásáya sammuti, so tunh’ assa, yassa na kkhamati, so 
bháseyya. sammatá så sim’ samghena ticivareus avippavå- 
så. khamati samghases, tasmå tunhi, evam etam dhårsyåmt- 
ti. 12 tena kho pena samayena bbikkhü bhagavatå ticiva- 
rena avippavüsasammuti anuññátá ’ti antaraghare civaråni 
nikkhipanti. tåvi civaråni nassanti pi dayhanti pi undurehi 
pi khajjanti, bbikkhO duooolå honti lükhacivar& bbikkt 
evam áhamsu: kisa tumhe Avuso duocolá lükhacivarà ’ti. 
idha mayam åvuso bhagavatà ticivarens evippavásasammuti 
anufiaåtå 'ti antaraghere civaråni nikkhipimhå, tàni ci- 
varåni nattbáni pi daddbåni pi undurehi pi kháyitáni. tene 
mayam duocolá låkhaciverå "і. bhagavato etam attham 
Árocesum, yà så bhikkhave samghena simå sammatá små- 
nasamvåså ekuposathá, samgho tam simam ticivarene 
avippavdsam sammannatu thapetvé gåmafi oa gámü- 
pacårañ ca. |311 evañ ca pana bhikkhave sammannitabbå : 
vyattena bhikkhun& patibalena samgho fi&petabbo: sunåtu 
me bhante samgho. yñ så samghens simå sammatå samána- 
samvåså ekuposathá, yadi samghassa pattakallam, samgbo 
tam simam ticfvarena avippavásam sammanneyya thapetvà 


110 MABAVAGGA. | [IL 18. 4-7. 


gimafi ca gåmåpecårafi ca. eså fiatti, sunita me bhante 
samgho. yñ så samghena simå sammetå samånasemvåst 
ekupossthá, samgho tam simam ticivarena avippavdsam sam- 
mannati thapetvå вёшей cs gåmipacåreå ca. yasshyasma- 
to khamati etisså simåya ticivarena avippavåsåye sammuti 
thapetva gåmafi ca gåmåpacårafi ca, so tunh' assa, yama na 
kkhamati, so bhåseyya. sammstå så simá samghens ticiva- 
rena avippavåså thapetvå gåmafi ca gámüpacürafi ca. kha- 
mati ватаћаява, tasmå tunhi, evam etam dbårayåmiti. 
141 simam bhikkhave sammannantena pathamam samåna- 
samvüsasimá sammannitabbå, peochå tioivarens avippavåso 
sammannitabbo. simam bhikkhave samihanantens pathamam 
ticivarena .svippaváso samühantabbo, peoché samånasam- 
vásasimá samühantabbá. evañ ca pana bhikkhave tictvarena 
avippavåso saamühantabbo: vyattena bhikkhun& patiba- 
lena samgho fidpetabbo: supátu me bhante samgho. уо so 
eamghena tioivarens avippavdso sammato, yadi samghasss 
pattakallam, samgho tam tiotvarena avippavåsam samühane- 
уув. es fatti. supátu me bhante samgho. уо во samgbena 
tictvarena avippsvåso sammato, samgho tam ticivarena avi- 
ppavåsam samåhaneti. yassiyasmato khamati etassa ticiva- 
rena avippavisassa samuggháto, so tunh’ assa, yasa ns 
kkhamati, eo bháseyya. samübato so samghena tioivarena 
avippavåso. khamsti samghasse, tasmå tunbt, ета etam 
dhårayåmiti. |61 етай ca pans bhikkhave simå samåhan- 
tabbá: vyattena bbikkhunå patibalena samgho fidpetabbo : 
sunåtu me bhante samgho. уй så samghens eimá sammatá 
aamånasamvåså ekuposathå, yadi samghassa pattakallam, 
samgho tam simam samühaneyya. esi fiatti. sugátu me 
bhante samgho. yá så samghena simå sammetå samána- 
samvåså ekupoeathá, samgho tam simam samühanati. yasså- 
yesmato khamati etisså simåye samÅnasamvåsåya екорова- 
thåya samuggháto, so tunh’ assa, узма na kkhamati, so 
bhåseyya. samühatA så simå samghena samånasamvåså eku- 
posathå. khamati samghaasa, tasmå tunbi, evam etam dhåra- 
yåmiti 161 ssammatáya bhikkhave simáya atthapitåya yam 
gåmam vå nigamam vå upanissiya vihereti, yà tassa và gå- 
тама gåmesimå nigamassa và nigamasimå, ayam tattha 


IT. 19. 7-14. 3) MAHÅVAGGA. 111 


samånasamvåså ekuposathå. sgåmake ce bhikkhave arafifie, 
samantå sattabbhantará ayam tatthe samånasamvåså ekupo- 
sathå. sabbå bhikkhave nedi asimå, sabbo samuddo astmo, 
sabbo jåtamsro asimo. nadiyå và bhikkhave samudde vá 
jåtassare vå yam majjhimasss purisassa samantå odakukkhe- 
pa, ayam tattha samånasamvåså ekuposatha ’ti. || 7 [12 


tena kho pane samsyens ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü simáya 
simam sambhindanti.  bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 
yesam bhikkhave simå pathamam sammatá, tesam tam ka- 
mmam dhammikam akuppam tbánársham.  yesam bhi- 
kkhave simå pacchá sammatå, tesam tam kammam adhammi- 
kam kuppam stthánáraeham. па bhikkhave simåys simå 
sambhinditabbá. yo sambhindeyys, åpatti dukkatasså "ti. 
[1l tena kho pena samsyene chabbaggiy& bhikkhü al- 
maya simam ajjhottharanti. bhagavato etam attham aro- 
oesum. yesam bhikkhave simå pathamam sammatá, tesam 
tam kammam dhammikam skuppam thånårabam. yesam 
bhikkhave sim& pacchå sammetå, tesam tam ksmmarp adhe- 
mmikam kuppam atthünàrsham. па bhikkhave simåya simå 
ajjhottharitabbå. yo ajjhotthareyya, åpatti dukkatasse. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave simam eammannantena simantari- 
kam thapetvA simam aammannitan ti |21181 


atha kho bhikkhünam etad ahosi: kati nu kho upo- 
sathü 'ti. bhagavato etam attham erocesum. dve 'me 
bhikkhave uposatbá o&tuddasiko са pannarasiko ca, 
ime kho bhikkhave dve uposathá ’ti. |11 atha kho bhi- 
kkhünam etad ahosi: kati nu kho uposathskemmániti. 
bhagsvato etam attham árocesum. cattår' imáni bhikkha- 
ve uposathekammáni, adhammena vaggam  uposathaka- 
mmam, sdhammens samaggam upossthakammam, dbamme- 
па vaggam upossthekamrmam, dhammena samaggam upo- 
satbakamman ti. tatra bhikkhave yam idam adhammena 
vaggam upossthakammam, na bhikkhave evarüpam upo- 
sathakammam kåtabbam na ca maya evarüpam uposatha- 
kammam anuflflåtam. (|2| tetra bhikkhave yam idam 
adhammena samaggam uposathakammam, na bhikkhave 


112 MAHÅVAGGA. (LI. 14. 3-18. 4. 


evarüpam . . . anufiåtam. tatra bhikkhave yam idam 
dhammens vaggam uposathakammam, ра bhikkhave 
evarüpam . . . anuñññtam. tatra bhikkhave yam idam 
dhammens eamaggam uposathakammam, evarüpam bhi- 
kkhave uposathakammam kåtabbam evarüpail ca mayá upo- 
sathakammam anufifidtam. tasmåt iha bhikkhave evarüpam 
uposathakemmam karissima уай idam dhammena samaggan 
ti, evañ hi vo bhikkhave sikkbitabban ti. ||3]14| 


atha kho bhikkhünam etad ehosi: kati nu kho påti- 
mokkhuddeså ’ti. bhagavato etam attham Arocesum. 
райс’ ime bhikkhave påtimokkhuddeså: nidånam uddisitvå 
avasesam sutena såvetabbam, ayam pathamo påtimokkhudde- 
eo. niddnam uddisitvå cattåri påråjikåni uddisitvå avasesam 
eutene sávetabbam, ayam dutiyo patimokkhuddeso. nidánam 
uddisitvå cattåri påråjikåni uddisitvå terasa samgbådisese 
uddisitvå avasesam sutena såvetabbam, ayam tatiyo påtimo- 
kkhuddeso. nidánam uddisitvå cattári påråjikåvi uddisitvå 
terasa samgbádisese uddisitvå dve aniyate uddisitvå avasesam 
sutena sávetabbam, ayam catuttho påtimokkhuddeso. vittbå- 
ren’ eva paficamo. ime kho bhikkhave рейса påtimokkhud- 
dead "tL [1] tena kho pana samayena bhikkhü bhagavata 
sarnkhittena påtimokkhuddeso anufiflåto "ti sabbakålam sam- 
khittena påtimokkhem uddisanti. bbagavsto etam 
attham årocesam. пе bhikkhave eamkbittena påtimokkham 
uddisitabbam. уо uddiseyya, Apatti dukkatasså "ti. 121 te- 
ne kho pana samayena Kosalesu janapadesu afifiatarasmim 
åvåse tadah’ upoeathe savarabhayam ahosi. bhikkhó nåss- 
kkhimeu vittbårens påtimokkham uddisitum. bhegavato etam 
attham &rooesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave sati antaråye 
semkhittena påtimokkhem uddisitun ti. |31] tena kho 
репа aamayens ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü алай pi antaråye 
samkhittena påtimokkham uddisanti bhagavato etam 
attham årocesum. na bhikkhave esati antaråye samkhitte- 
na pátimokkham uddisitabbam. yo uddiseyya, åpatti du- 
kkatassa anujånåmi bhikkhave sati antaråye samkhittena 
påtimokkham uddisitum. tatr’ ime entardy4: råjantarå- 
yo corantaråyo agyantaråyo udakantaråyo manussantaråyo 


II. 16. 4-10.) MAHÅVAGGA. 113 


amanussantaráyo vålsntaråyo sirimsapantardyo jivitantaråyo 
brahmacariyantaráyo. anujånåmi bhikkhave evardpesu anta- 
råyesu samkhittene påtimokkham uddisitum, asati antaråye 
vitthårenå ’ti. 141 tena kho pans eamayena chebbaggiy& 
bhikkhü eamghamajjhe anajjhitth4 dhammam bhåsanti. 
bhagavato etam attham árocesum. na bhikkhave samgha- 
majjhe ensjjhitthena dhammo bhásitabbo. уо bhå- 
seyya, Apatti dukkatasss. anvjånåmi bhikkhave therena 
bhikkhuné simam và dhemmam bbåsitum param vå sjjhe- 
&itun ti. ||5|| tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiy& bhi- 
kkhü samghamajjhe assmmatá vinayam pucchanti. bhaga- 
vato etam attham årocesum. ne bhikkhave samghamejjhe 
asammatena vinayo pucchitabbo. уо puccheyya, 
&patti dukkatass, anujAnémi bhikkhave samghamajjhe sam- 
matena vinayam pucchitum. evañ ca pena bhikkhave 
sammannitabbo: attanå ’va attAnam sammannitabbam 
parens vá paro sammannitsbbo. [161] kathañ ca attanå ’va 
attånam sammannitabbam. vyattena bhikkhuná patibalens 
samgho ilåpetabbo: sunåtu me bhante samgho. yadi sam- 
ghassa pattakallam, aham itthannimam vinayam puccheyyan 
ti. evam attanå 'va attånam sammannitabbam. kathafl ca 
parena paro sammeunitabbo. vyattens bhikkhun& patiba- 
lena samgho fiåpetabbo: supåtu me bhante samgho, yadi 
samgbeses pattakallam, itthannümo itthannåmam vinsyam 
puccheyyå "ti evam parena paro sammannitabbo ”ti. ||7|| 
tena kho pana samayena pesalå bhikkhü samghamajjhe sam- 
matå vineysm pucohanti. ohebbaggiyå bhikkhü la- 
bhanti &ghátam, labhanti appaecayam, vadhena tajjenti. 
bhagavato etam ettham årocesum.  anuj&nàmi bhikkhave 
samgbamaejjhe sammatens pi parisam oloketvå puggalam tu- 
Iayitvá vinayam pucchitun ti. 118] tena kho pana samayena 
chabbaggiya bhikkhü samghamajjhe asammat& vinayam 
commas — bhagavato etam attham årocesum. na bhi- 
kkhave samghamajjhe asammatena vineyo vissajje- 
tabbo. yo vissajjeyya, åpatti dukketassa. anuj&námi bhi- 
kkhave samghamajjhe sammatena vinayam vissajjetum. етай 
са pana bhikkhave ssmmannitabbo : attanå ’va attAnam sam- 
mannitabbam parena vå paro sammannitabbo. [9|| Кабай 


VOL, IH. 8 


114 MAHÁYAGOA. [IL 18. 10-16. 4. 


са attanå "va attånam sammannitabbam. vyattens bhikkhu- 
nå patibalena samgbo flåpetabbo : aunåtu me bbante samgho. 
yadi samghessa pattakallam, aham itthannámens vinayam 
puttho vissajjeyyan ti. evam attanå 'va attånam sammanni- 
tabbam. Каїһай ca parena paro sammannitabbo. vyattena 
bhikkhunå petibalene samgho fiåpetabbo: sunåtu me bhante 
eamgho. yadi samghassa pattakallam, itthannåmo itthanná- 
mena vinayam puttho vissajjeyy4 ‘ti. evam parens paro 
sammannitabbo 'ti. 1101 tena kho pana samayene pesalå 
bhikkhü samghamajjhe sammatå vinsyam vissajjenti. oha- 
bbaggiy4 bhikkhü labhanti ågbåtam, labbanti appaoos- 
yam, vadhens tajjenti. bhagavsto etam attham &rocesum. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave samghamajjhe sammatena pi parisam 
oloketvå puggalam tulayitvå vingyam vissajjetun ti. | 11115) 


tens kho pans samayens ohabbaggiyå bhikkhá anokå- 
sakatam bhikkhum åpattiyå oodenti. bhagavato etam attham 
Aroceeum. па bhikkhave anokåsakato bhikkhu åpattiyå co- 
detabbo. yo codeyya, Apatti dukketass. —anuján&mi bhi- 
kkhave okåsam kåråpetvå åpattiyå oodetum karotu Ayasmå 
okåsam aham tam vattukAmo ’ti. |11 tena kho pana sama- 
yena pesalå bhikkht chabbaggiye bbikkbü okåsam kårå- 
petvå åpattiyå codenti. obhabbaggiyå bhikkhü labhanti åghå- 
tam, labbanti appsccayam, vadhene tsjjenti. bhugavato 
etam attham árocesum. anuján&mi bhikkhave kate pi okåse 
puggalam tulayitvå åpattiyå codetan ti. |2|| tena kho pana 
eamayena chabbaggiy& bhikkhü рог ambåkem pesalå 
bhikkhü okásam kåråpentiti petigsco' eva suddhánam bhi- 
kkhånam anåpattikånam avatthusmim akårane okñsam kárá- 
penti. bhsgavato etam attham &rooesum. па bhikkhave 
suddbånam bhikkhünam anápettikánam avatthusmim ak&- 
rane okåso karApetabbo. yo kár&peyya, Apatti dukkatassa. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave puggalam tulayitvå okåsam kåråpetun 
ti. 131 tene kho pana eamayena ohabbaggiy& bhikkhü 
samgbamajjhe adhammskammam karonti. ` bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. na bhikkhave samgbamajjbe adha- 
momakammam kåtebbam. yo kareyya, Apatti dukkatassá ’ti. 
karonti yeva adhammakammam. bhagavato etam attham 


IL 10. 4-17. 1.) MAHÅVAGGA. 115 


årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave adhammakamme kayira- 
måne patikkositup ti. [4 tena kho pans samayena pesalá 
bhikkhà chabbaggiyehi bhikkühi adhammakamme kayi- 
ramáne patikkosanti chsbbaggiyá bkikkhü labhanti åghå- 
tam, labbanti appsccsyam, vadhens tejjenti. bhagavato 
etam attham årooesum.  anujánümi bhikkhave ditthim pi 
åvikåtan ti. бовар yeva santike ditthim &vikeronti oha- 
bbeggiyå bhikkhü labbanti &gh&tam, lebhanti appeccayam, 
vadhena tsjjenti. bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. anu- 
jånåmi bhikkhave catuhi paficahi petikkositum, dvihi tibi 
ditthim åvikåtum, ekena adhitthåtum na me tam khamatiti. 
Ui tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyá bhbikkht 
samghamajjhe pàtimokkham uddisamáná saficicoa na så- 
venti  bhagavato etam attham &rooeseum. na bhikkhave 
pAtimokkhuddesakena вайоісса na såvetabbam. уо na så- 
veyys, spatti dukkatasså 'ti. |611 tena kho pana samayena 
&yasmá Udåyi samghessa påtimokkhuddesako hoti kåksssa- 
rako. atha kho &yasmato Udáyissa etad ahosi: bhagavatå 
peiiilattam pátimokkhuddesakena sávetabben ti, ahañ c' amhi 
kükassarako. katham nu kho mayá patipajjitabban ti. bha- 
gavato etam attham árocesum. snujånåmi bbikkbave påti- 
mokkhuddesakena váyamitum katham såveyyan ti, vàya- 
mantama svåpattiti. |7|| tena kho pana samayena Deva- 
datto sagahatthåye parisåye pátimokkham uddisati. 
bhagavato etam attham Aroceaum. na bhikkhave sagahe- 
tthåya рагілдув påtimokkbam uddisitabbam. yo uddiseyys, 
Apatti dukkstassA ”ti. ||8|| tena kho pana samayens cha- 
bbaggiyà bhikkhü samghamajjhe anajjhitthá phtimokkham 
uddisenti bhagavato etam attham årocesum. na bhi- 
kkhave samghamajjhe enajjhitthens påtimokkham uddi- 
sitabbam. yo uddiseyya, ápatti dukkatassa. anujdndmi 
bhikkhave tberådhikam påtimokkhan ti. 19/16 
afiflatitthiyebhanavaéram nittbitam. 


atha kho bhegavà Råjagahe yethåbhirantam viheritvå 
yena Codanávatthu tena cårikam реккАші anupubbe- 
ne cárikam caramáno yena Codanåvatthu tad avasari. tene 
kho pana samayens afiflatarasmim åvåse sambehulå bhikkhü 


116 MAHÅVAGGA. I]. 17. 1-6. 


viharanti, tattha thero bhikkhu bilo hoti avyatto, во na 
jAnAti uposatham và uposathakammam vA påtimokkham уй 
patimokkhuddesam vA. [|1] atha kho tesam bhikkhünam 
etad аһовї: bhagavatA pafifiattam theridhikam påtimokkhan 
ti, ayafi ca amhákam thero bálo avyatto, na ján&ti uposatbam 
va... pAtimokkhuddesam vå. katham nu kho amhehi 
patipajjitabban ti. bhagavato etam attbam Árooosum. anu- 
jánümi bhikkhave yo tatths bhikkhu vyatto patibalo tasså- 
dheyyam pátimokkhan ti .||2| tena kho pana samayena 
afifiatarasmim åvåse tadah’ uposathe sambehulé bhikkhü 
viharanti БАЈА avyattå, te na jånanti uposstham vå uposatha- 
kammam vå påtimokkbam vá pátimokkhuddesam vå, te 
theram sjjhesimeu uddisatu bhante thero p&timokkhen ti. 
во evam ha: па me Avuso vattatiti. dutiyatheram ajjhe- 
simsu uddisatu bhante thero påtimokkhan ti. so pi evam 
Aba: na me Avuso vattatiti. tatiyatheram ajjhesimsu uddi- 
eatu bhante thero pátimokkhan ti. so pi evam &ha: na me 
Avuso vattatiti. eten’ eva upåyena yåvs eamghanavakam 
ajjhesimsa uddisatu &yesmá påtimokkhen ti. во pi evam 
ñha: na me bhante vattatiti. bhagavato etam attham ёго- 
севип. |181! idha pana bhikkhave afifiatarasmim åvåse ta- 
dah’ uposathe sambahulå bhikkhü viharanti bålå avyettå, to 
na jånanti uposatham уй . . . p&timokkhuddesam vå. te 
theram ajjhesanti uddisatu bbante thero påtimokkhan ti. во 
evam vadeti: na me Åvuso vattatiti. dutiyatheram ajjhesaa- 
(i uddisatu bhante thero påtimokkhan ti. so pi evam va- 
deti: па me åvuso vattatiti. ||4| tatiyatheram ajjhesanti 
uddisatu bhante thero p&timokkhan ti. so pi evam vadeti : 
na me Avuso vattatiti. eten" eva upåyena yAva samghana- 
vakam ajjbesanti uddisatu åyasmå påtimokkhan ti. so pi 
evam vadeti: na me bhante vattatiti. tehi bhikkhave bhi- 
kkhübi eko bhikkhu såmautå ávàsá sajjukam p&hetabbo 
ghochávuso samkhittena và vitthårena và påtimokkham pa- 
riyåpunitvå Agacché ‘ti. |5|| atha kho bhikkhünam etad 
аһовї: kena nu kho påhetabbo "ti. bhagavato etam attham 
Årocesum. anujünümi bhikkhave therena bhikkhun& паташ 
bhikkhum ApApeton ti. therenm &pattà navå bhikkhü na 
gecchanti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. na bhikkhave 


IL 17. 6-19. 1.) MAHÅVAGGA. 117 


therens Anattens agilanens na gantabbam. yo na gacohe- 
уув, Apatti dukkatassá "ti. (16111714 


atha kho bhagavé Codanávatthuamim yathåbhirantam 
viharitvå punad eva Råjagaham paccdgacchi tena kho 
pana samayena manusså bhikkhü pindáya carante pucchanti: 
katimt bhante pekkhass& "ti. bhikkhü evam &hamsu: па 
kho mayam åvuso ján&má ’ti. manussá ujjhéyanti khiyanti 
vipAcenti: pakkhagananamattam р’ ime вашарё Sakyaputti- 
yå na jånanti, kim pan’ ime afifiam kifici kalyåpam jåni- 
seantiti.  bhagavato etam attham Arocesum.  anuján&ámi 
bhikkhave pakkhagapanem uggahetun (і. |1] atha kho 
bhikkhünam etad вһові: kena nu kho pakkhagananå ugga- 
hetabbå "ti. bhagavato etam attham Агосевшр. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave sabbeh’ eva pekkhsgansnam uggshetun tü ||2|| 
tena kho репа samsyena manussá bhikkhü pindåye carante 
pucchanti: kivatikå bhante bhikkhü ‘ti.  bhikkhà evam 
&hamsu: ns kho mayam åvuso jånåmå 'ti. manusså ujjhá- 
yanti khiyanti vipácenti: afifiamafifiam p’ ime samaņå Sa- 
kyapattiyé ne jånanti, kim pan’ ime айдат kifici kalyåpam 
jånissantiti. bhagavato etam attham Arocesum. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave bhikkhå genetun ti. [|3 atha kho bhikkhá- 
nam etad ahosi: ksdå nu kho bhikkhü gapetabbá ’ti, bha- 
gavato etam attham Arocesum. anujdnAmi bhikkhave tadah’ 
uposathe ganamaggens vå ganetum salükam và ga- 
hetan ti. 1141181 


tena kho pana samayens bhikkhü ajånantå ajj’ uposatho 
"Ы düram gåmam pindåya caranti. te uddissamáne pi påti- 
mokkhe Agacchanti udditthamatte pi &gacchanti. bhagavato 
etam attham Arocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave drocetum 
ajj’ upoeatho ‘ti atha kho bhikkhünam etad ahosi: kena nu 
kho árocetabbo "ti. bhagavato etam attham Arocesum. anu- 
jånåmi bhikkhave therena bhikkhun& kålavato Arocetun ti. 
tena kho pana samayena aññataro thero kålavsto ne esarati. 
bhagavato etam attham &roceeum.  anuj&námi bhikkhave 
bhattakAle pi årocetun ti. bhattakále pi na ssari. bhagsva- 
to etam attham arocesum. anujindmi bhikkeve yam Кат 
sarati, tam kålam årocetun ti. 1 1/191! 


118 MAHÅVAGGA. (II. 90. 1-5. 


tena kho pana samayens afiflatarasmim åvåse upossthågå- 
ram uklåpam hoti ågantukå bhikkhf ujjbåyanti khiyanti 
vipåcenti: katham bi nåms bhikkhü upossthágáram na 
sammajjissantiti. bhagavato etam attham Arocesum. anujå- 
nimi bhikkhave upoeathågåram sammajjitun ti JLI 
atha kho bhikkhünam etad ahosi: kenas nu kho uposathå- 
garam sammejjitabban ti. bhagavate etam attham Агосе- 
sum. snujdndmi bhikkheve therens bbikkhunå navam bhi- 
kkhum &påpetun ti. therena ånpettå navà bhikkhü na 
messen  bhagavato etam ettham årocesum. na bhi- 
kkbeve tberena &psttena agilAnena na sammajjitabbam. уо 
па sammajjeyya, åpatti dukkatasså ”ti. |2] tena kho pana 
вашвуепа upoeathügáre fsanam epafifiattam hoti. bbikkhü 
ohamåyam nisidanti. gattåni pi civeråni pi pamsukitáni 
honti. bhagsvato etam sttham árocesum. anujånåmi bhi- 
kkhave uposathågåre &ásanam paññápetun ti. atha kho 
bhikkhünam etad ahosi: kena nu kho uposathågåre åsanam 
paiifidpetabban ti. bhagavato etam attham árocesum. anu- 
jånåmi bhikkhave therena bbikkhunå navam bhikkhom &pà- 
petunti therena AnattA navå bhikkhü na pefiflápenti. bha- 
gavato etam attham årocesum. na bhikkhave therena ápa- 
ttena agilånens na pafifidpetabbam. уо na paññápeyys, 
Арені dukkatasså 'ti. |13] tena kho pana samayena uposa- 
thågåre padipo na hoti. bhikkhO andhaktre kåyam pi 
otvaram pi akkamanti. bhagevato etam attham drocesum. 
snujánámi bhikkhave wuposatbågåre padipam kåton ti. 
atha kho bbikkhünam etad ahosi: kena nu kho upossthå- 
gare padipo kåtabbo ‘ti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave therena bhikkhuná navam bhikkhum 
ånåpetun ti therena ápattà navå bbikkhü па pedipenti. 
bhagavato etam attham frocesum. na bhikkhave therena 
Ánsttena agilánena ne padipetabbo. уо na padipeyya, åpatti 
dukkatasså "ti. |4] tena kho рапа samayena afifiatarasmim 
Avåse åvåsikå bhikkhü n’ eva påpiyam upatthApenti na pari- 
bhojaniyam upetthüápenti ^ &gantuká bhikkbå ujjbáyanti 
kbiyanti vipácenti: ketham bi n&ma åvåsikå bhikkhü n’ eva 
påniyam upettháüpessanti na paribhojaniyam upatthápessanti- 
ti. bhagavato etam айаш árooesum. snujånåmi bhikkha- 


IL 90. 5-81. 3.) MAHÁVÁGGA. 119 


ve pàniyam paribhojaniyam upatthápetun ti |5} 
atha kho bhikkhünam etad ahosi: kena nu kho påniyam 
peribhojaniyam upatthåpetabban ti. bhagavato etam attham 
&rocesmm. anujånåmi bhikkhave therena bhikkhunå пата 
bbikkhum ånåpetun ti. therena ápattá navå bhikkhü na 
upatthåpenti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. ma bhi- 
kkhave therena ånattena agilånens na upatthåpetabbam. уо 
na upattbåpeyye, åpatti dukkatassá ‘ti. 16/20 | : 


tena kho pana mmayena sambehulå bhikkh bala avyatta 
disamgamikA АсагіупрајјЬёуе ns &pucchimsu. bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. idha pana bbikkhave sambehulå 
bhikkhü balé avyattå disamgamika &cariyapsjjbáye na ápu- 
echanti. tehi bhikkhave &cariyupajjbüyehi pucobitabba : 
kaham gamissathe, kena saddhim gamissatha ’ti te ce bhi- 
kkhave bala avyattà aüfie bile avyatte apadiseyyum, na 
bbikkhave &ceriyupejjbàyehi anujánitabbá. — snujáneyyum 
ce, åpatti dukkatasss. te сө bhikkhave bålå avyattá an- 
anufifiAtd åcsriyupejjhåyehi gaccheyyum, åpatti dukkatasas. 
НІП idha pena bhikkhave afiflatarasmim &váse sambahulå 
bhikkhü viharanti bålå avyattá te na jánanti upoeatham 
và upossthakammam vå pátimokkham va pátimokkhuddesam 
vå. {аа айдо bhikkhu ågacchati bahussuto ågatågamo 
dbammadharo vinayedharo måtikådharo pandito vyatto me- 
dbávi lajji kukkuocako sikkhåkåmo. tehi bhikkhave bhi- 
kkhühi eo bhikkhu samgshetabbo anuggahetabbo upalåpe- 
tabbo upattbåpetabbo ounnens mettikåya dantakatthene mu- 
khodakena. по ce samganheyyum anuganheyyum upelå- 
peyyum upetthåpeyyum cunnens mattik&ya dantakatthena 
mukhodskena, apatti dukkataasa. |211 idha pana bhikkbave 
afiiiatarasmim åvåse tadah’ uposathe sambehulé bhikkhü 
vibaranti bålå avyettå. te na jånanti upoestbam vA... 
påtimokkbuddesam vå, tehi bhikkhave bhikkhühi eko bhi- 
kkhu såmantå åvåså sajjukam påhetabbo gaochåvuso 
samkbittena vå vitthérena vå pátimokkham pariyåpunitvå 
ÁÉgacohA "ti. evam ce tam labbethe, ico etam kusalam. по oe 
labhetha, tehi bhikkhave bhikkhühi sabbeh' eva yattha jè- 
nanti uposatham vå . . . påtimokkhuddesam vå, so Åvåso 


120 MAHÅVAGGA. (17. 91. 3-29. 3. 


gantabbo. no ce gaccheyyum, Apatti dukkstaæs. | 311 idha 
pana bhikkhave aññatarasmim Avdse sambebulå bhikkhf 
vassam vasanti bålå avyattå. te na jånanti uposstbam vå 
. . . pátimokkhuddesam va. tebi bhikkhave bhikkhühi eko 
bhikkhu sámantá åvåså sajjukam påhetabbo gacchávuso 
samkhittena và vitthüárena và påtimokkham pariyåpunitvå 
Agaccha "ti. evam ce tam labhetha, icc etam kumlam. no 
ce labhetha, eko bhikkhu sattáhakálikem påhetabbo gaccha- 
vuso samkbittena vå vitthárena vå pátimokkbam pariyåpu- 
nitvå Agacchaé 'ti. evam ce tam labhetha, icc etam kusalam. 
no ce labhetha, na bhikkhave tehi bhikkhühi tasmim 
&vüse vassam vasitabbam. vaseyyum се, dpatti dukkatasså 
^i. 421 


atha kho bbagavå bhikkhü Amentesi: sannipatatba 
bhikkhave, samgho uposatham karissatiti. evam vutte 
afifiataro bhikkhu bhagavantam etad avoca: atthi bhante 
bhikkha giláno, so anågato "ti. anujånåmi bhikkhave gi- 
1&пепа bhikkhund pårisuddbim datum. evañ ca pana 
bhikkhave dåtabbå: tena gilanene bhikkhunå ека bhi- 
kkhum upasamkamitvå ekamsam uttarásangam karitvå ukku- 
tikam vistditvå afijalim paggabetvå evam assa vacantyo: på- 
risuddhim dammi, pårisuddhim me hara, pårisuddhim me 
årooebiti kåyena viflfiApeti, våcåya vififiApeti, k&yena vå- 
eàya vififlåpeti, dinnå hoti párisuddhi, na kAyena viññApeti, 
na våcåyå viññápeti, na kåyene våcåya vififidpeti, na dinnå 
hoti pårisuddhi. ||1]] evam ce tam labhetha, ioo etam kusa- 
lam. по ce labhetha, so bhikkhave gilåno bhikkbu тайсепа 
và pithene vá samghamajjhe Anetvå upoeatho kåtabbo. sace 
bhikkhave gilånupattbåkånam bhikkhünam evam hoti: sace 
kho mayam gilånam tbånå cåvessåma, åbådho vë abhivaddbi- 
esati kålamliriyå vå bhavissatiti, na bhikkhave gilåno thånå 
cAvetabbo, samghena tattha gantvå uposatho kåtabbo, na tv 
eva vaggene samghena uposatho kåtabbo. Кагеууа ce, 
&patti dukkatassa. ||2|| pårisuddbibårako oe bhikkhave di- 
nnáya pårisuddhiyå tatth’ eva pakkamati, aññassa dåtabbå 
párieuddhi. pårisuddhibårako ce bhikkhave dinnéya påri- 
suddhiyå tatth’ eva vibbhamati, kålam karoti, såmanero 


IL $3. 3.23. 2.] MAHÁVAGGA. 121 


patijånåti, sikkham paccakkhAtako patijanAti, antimavatthum 
ejjhápannako petijånåti, ummattako p., khittacitto p., veda- 
natto p., ApattiyA edassane ukkhittako p., åpettiyå appa- 
tikamme ukkhittako p. påpikåye ditthiyå appatinissagge 
nkkhittako p., papdako p., theyyesamvásako p., titthiya- 
pakkantako p., tiracchånagato p., mAtughAtako p., pitughå- 
tako p., arahantaghåtako p., bhikkhunidüsako p., samgha- 
bhedako p., lohituppådako p., ubhatovyafijanako patijånåti, 
аййазва dåtsbbå pårisuddhi. ||3]| p&risuddhiháreko oe bhi- 
kkhave dinnåya párisuddhiyá antará magge pakkamati, 
anñhatá hoti pårisuddhi. pårisuddhihårako ce bhikkhave 
dinnáys péárisuddhiyá entará шарре vibbbamati, kålam 
karoti — pe — ubhatovyafijanako petijånåti, anåhatå hoti 
pårisuddhi. pårisaddhihårako ce bhikkhave діподув påri- 
øuddhiyå samghappatto pakkamati, åbatå hoti pårisuddhi. 
pårisuddhihårako oe bhikkhave dinn&ys pårisuddhiyå sam- 
ghappatto vibbbamati, kAlam karoti —la— ubhatovyafija- 
nako patijånåti, dhata hoti pårieuddhi. pårisuddhihårako ce 
bhikkhave dinn&ya pårisuddhiyå samgheppatto sutto na åro- 
ceti, pamatto na Åroceti, samåpanno na árooeti, &hatA hoti 
pårisoddbi, pårisuddhihårakasss andpatti. pårisuddhihårako 
се bhikkhave dinnåyae pårisuddhiyå samghappatto вайсіоса 
Da åroceti, åhatå hoti pårisuddhi, párisuddhih&rakasea Apatti 
dukkatassé "ti. |4122 


atha kho bhagavé bbikkhü &mantesi: sannipatatha bhi- 
kkhave, samgho kammam karissatiti. evam vutte afiflataro 
bhikkha bhagaventam etad avoca: atthi bbante bhikkhu 
gilåno, so воёдаќо 'ti. anujånåmi bhikkhave gilànena 
bhikkhunà ohsndam dåtum. evañ ca pena bhikkhave 
dåtabbo: tena gilånena bhikkhun& ekam bhikkhum upa- 
samkamitvå ekamsam uttardsaigam karitvå ukkutikam nisi- 
ditvà afijalim paggahetvå evam assa vacaniyo: chandam 
dammi, chandam me hara, chandam me årocehiti kåyens 
vifliiåpeti, våcåya vififlåpeti, kåyena våcåye vififidpsti, dinno 
hoti chando, na kåyena уіййарей, na våcåya тіййАреб, na 
kåyena våcåya viilüàpeti, na dinno hoti chando. [1] evam 
ce tam labhetha, ico etam kusalam. по ce labhetha, so bhi- 


199 MAHAVAGGA. (LI. 85. 2-94. 3. 


kkhave gilåno bhikkhu mañcena vå pithena và samgha- 
majjhe Anetvå kammam kåtabbam. sace bhikkhave gilånu- 
petthákánam bhikkhünam evam hoti: sace kho mayam 
gilånam tbånå cåvessåma, åbådho và abbivaddhisæti kAlam- 
kiriyA vå bhavisesttti, na bhikkhave gilåno thAnd cåvetabbo, 
eamghens tettha gantvå kammam kåtabbam, na tv eva 
vaggena samghena kammam kåtabbam. kareyya oe, Apatti 
dukketasm. ||2/| chandabårako се bhikkhave dinne chande 
tatth’ eva pakkamati, afifiasss dåtabbo chando. chandahårako 
ce bhikkhave dinne chande tatth’ eva vibbhamati, kálam ka- 
roti . . . ubhstovyafijanako patij&náti, afifiassa dåtabbo chando. 
ohandahårako ce bhikkhave dinne ohande antarå magge 
pakkamati, anåhato hoti obando. ohandahårsko ce . . . 
(comp. II. 22. 4) . . . chaudabårakassa Араб: dukkatasen. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave tadah’ uposathe pårisuddhim dentena 
chandam pi dátum santi samghasss karantyan ti. 131981 


tena kho pana samayena afifiataram bhikkhum tadah’ upo- 
sathe fidtaka ganhimsu. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 
idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhum tadah’ upoesthe fi&taká 
gaphanti, te fiåtakå bhikkhühi evam assu vacaniyå: ingha 
tumhe åyasmsauto imam bhikkhum mubuttam muficstba yå- 
våyam bhikkbu uposstham karotiti. |111 evam ce tam 
labhetha, ioo etam kusalam, no ce labhetha, te flåtakå bhi- 
kkhühi evam assu vacaniyå: ingha tumhe Ayasmanto mu- 
huttam ekamantam hotha yåvåyam bhikkhu párisuddhim 
дени, evam oe tam labheths, ico etam kusalam. по ce 
labhetha, te ñâtakå bhikkhühi evam assu vacaniyà: ingha 
tumhe åyasmanto imam bbikkhum muhuttam nisstmam ne- 
tha yåva samgho uposatham karotiti. evam ce tam labhetha, 
ico etam kusalam, no ce labhetha, па tv eva vaggens sam- 
ghena uposatho kátabbo. kereyys ce, &patti dukkatasse. (2 
idha pana bhikkhave bbikkbum tadah’ uposathe råjåno 
ganhanti — la — cord gaphanti, dhuttà ganbanti, bhikkhé 
paocatthikå ganhanti. te bhikkhü paccatthikA bhikkhéhi 
evam assu vacaniyá: ingha . . . (сотр. $ 1. 2) .. . na 
tv етв vaggena samghens uposatho kåtabbo. kareyya oe, 
Apatti dokkatasså 'ti. 1311241 


п. 98, 1-4.] MAHÅVAGGA. 123 


atha kho bhagavå bbikkhå Amantesi: sannipatatha bhi- 
kkhave, atthi samghassa karaniyan ti. evam vutte аййа(аго 
bhikkhu bhagavantam etad avoca: atthi bhante Gaggo nå- 
ma bhikkhu ummattako, so anågato 't dve ‘me bhi- 
kkhave ummattakA: atthi bbikkbu ummattako sarati pi 
uposstham ne pi sarati, sarati pi samghakammam na рі 
sarati, atthi n' eva sarati, Agaoohati pi uposatham na pi åga- 
echati, Agacohati pi samghakammam пе pi Agacchati, atthi 
п’ eva Agacohati. |11 tatra bhikkhave yv Ayam ummattako 
sarati pi uposatham na pi earati, sarati pi samghakammam 
na pi sarati, Agacchati pi uposatham ns pi Agecchati, åga- 
ochati рі samghakammam na pi Agacohati, anujindmi bhi- 
kkhave evarfpassa ummattakasss ummattakasammutim 
datum. |121 етай ca pana bhikkhave dAtabbé: vyattens 
bhikkhuná petibalena samgho flåpetabbo: sunåtu me bhante 
samgho. Gaggo bhikkhu ummattako sarati pi uposatham 
na pi sarati, sarati pi samghakammam na pi sarati, Agacohati 
pi uposatham na pi Agacchati, ågaochati pi samghakammam 
na pi Ágacchati. yadi samghasss pattakallam, samgho Ga- 
øgassa bhikkhuno ummattakases ummattakasammutim da- 
deyya sareyya và Gaggo bhikkhu uposatham na vå sareyys, 
sareyya và samghakammam na vå sareyya, dgaccheyya vá upo- 
entham na và dgacoheyya, ågaocheyya vå samghakammam па 
vå ågaocheyya, samgho saha vå Gaggena vind và Gaggens 
uposatham kareyya samghakammam kareyya. esd fiatti. |18 | 
supátu me bhante samgho. Gaggo bbikkhu ummattako ва- 
rati pi aposatham . . . na pi ågaoohati. samgho Gaggassa 
bhikkbuno ummattakassa ummettakasammutim deti sareyys 
vå Gaggo . . . na vå &gacoheyya, samgho eaha vå Gaggena 
vind vå Gaggens uposatham karissati samghakammam ka- 
risati. yassåyasmato khamati Gaggasss bhikkhuno umma- 
ttakassa ummattakssammutiyà dånam sareyyn và . . . 
samghakammam karissati, so tuph' assa, yassa na kkhamati, 
жо bhfseyya. dinnå samghene Gaggassa bhikkhuno ummatta- 
kassa ummattakasammuti sareyya và . . . samghakammam 
karisseti. khamati samghasse, tamná tupbi, evam etam 
dhárayámtti. 1412511 


124 MAHÅVAGGA. [11. 98. 1-6. 


tena kho pana samayena efifistaresmim åvåse tadah’ upo- 
sathe cattåro bbikkhå viharanti aths kho tesam bhi- 
kkhünam etad ahosi: bhagavatå pafifiattam uposatho kå- 
tabbo 'ti, mayañ o amhå cattåro janå. Каат nu kho 
ambebi uposatho kåtabbo ‘ti. bhagavato etam attham aro- 
oesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave catunnam påtimokkham uddi- 
situn ti 1] tena kho pana samayena afiflatarasmim &váse 
tadah’ uposathe tayo bhikkhü viharanti. atha kho tesam 
bhikkhünam etad ahosi: bhagavatA anuififidtam catunnam 
påtimokkham uddisitum, mayafi c’ amhå tayo jenå. Каат 
nu kho amhebi uposatho kåtabbo ‘ti. bbagavato etam 
attham årocesum. anujindmi bhikkhave tinpam påri- 
suddhiuposatham kåtum. ||2|| evañ ca pana bhikkhave 
kåtabbo: vyattena bhikkhun& petibalena te bhikkhü fiåpe- 
tabbá: sunantu me áyasmanto. ajj’ uposatho pannersso. 
yad’ &yasmantánam pattakallam, mayam aññamaññam på- 
risuddhiuposatbam kareyyåmå ‘ti. therena bhikkhuná 
uttaråsafigem karitvå ukkutikam nisiditvå añjalim 
paggahetvå te bhikkhü evam assu vacaniyA: parisuddho 
aham åvuso, parisuddho ’ti mam dhåretha, parieuddho aham 
Avuso, parisuddho "ti mam dháretha, parisuddho aham åvuso, 
parisuddho ’ti mam dhåretbå ’ti. 1311 navakena bhikkhun& 
ekamsam uttaråsangam karitvå ukkutikam nisiditvå afijalim 
peggahetvà te bhikkhü evam assu vacaniyå: parisuddho aham 
bhante, parisuddho 'ti mam dbárethe, parisuddho aham 
bhante, parisuddho ‘ti mam dháretha, perisaddho aham 
bhante, parisuddho 'ti mam dhårethå 'ti. [41 tena kho 
репа samayena afifiatarasmim Avåse tadah’ uposathe dve 
bhikkhü vibaranti. atha kho tesam bhikkhünam etad aho- 
ві: bhagavetå anufifiátam catunnam påtimokkham uddisitum, 
tinpannam périsuddhiuposatham kAtum, mayan с’ amhá dve 
janå. katham nu kho amhebi upoeatho kåtabbo ’ti. bhaga- 
vato etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave dvinnam 
pårisuddhiuposatham kåtum. ||5] evañ ca pana bhi- 
kkhave kåtabbo : tberena bhikkhunå ekamsam uttaråsaigam 
karitvà ukkutikam nisiditv& afijalim paggahetvà navo bhi- 
kkhu evam assa vacaniyo: perisuddho abam Avuso, pari- 
suddho "ti mam dhárehi, parisuddho aham åvuso, parisuddho 


IL. 96. 6-97. 1.] MAHÅVAGGA. 126 


"ti mam dhårehi, parisuddho aham åvuso, parisuddho ’ti mam 
dhárehíti. |6| navakena bhikkhunà ekamsam uttaråsafigam 
karitvà ukkutikam nisiditvå afijelim paggahetv& thero bhi- 
kkhu evam asa vacaniyo: perisuddho aham bbante, pari- 
suddho 'ti mam dhåretha, parisuddho sham bhante, pari- 
suddho ’ti mam dhåretbe, parisuddho aham bhante, pari- 
suddho 'ti mam dhårethå ’ti. 117 1 tena kho pana ватауепа 
afifiatarasmim åvåse tadah’ uposathe eko bhikkhu viharati. 
atha kho tassa bhikkhono etad ahosi: bhagavetå anufifiåtam 
catunnam pátimokkham oddisitum, tinganpam pårisaddhi- 
uposatham kåtum, dvinnam périsuddhiuposatham kåtum, 
ahañ c' amhi ekako, katham nu kho mayá uposatho kåtabbo 
"й. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. |8|| idba pana bhi- 
kkheve afifiatarasmim &váse tadah’ upoeathe eko bhikkhu vi- 
harati. tena bhikkhave bhikkhun& yattha bbikkbå pati- 
kkamanti upatthånasålåya và mandape và rukkhamile vå, so 
deso sammajjitvå påniyam paribbojaniyam upatthåpetvå &aa- 
nam paññápetvá padipam ketvå nisiditabbam. sace aññe 
bhikkhü ågacchanti, tehi saddhim uposatho kåtabbo, no ce 
Agacchanti, ajja me uposatho 'ti adhitth&átabbam. по ce 
adbitthaheyya, åpetti dukkatasss. |9 tatra bhikkhave 
yattha cattáro bbikkhü viheranti, na ekassa párisuddhim 
G&haritva tihi pátimokkham uddisitabbam. uddiseyyam ce, 
Apatti dukkatassa. tatra bhikkhave yattha tayo bhikkhd 
viharanti, па ekassa pürisuddhim åheritvå dvthi périsuddhi- 
uposatho kåtabbo. kareyyum се, Apatti dukkatassa. tatra 
bbikkhave yattha dve bhikkhü viharanti, na ekassa påri- 
suddhim åharitvå ekena adhitthátabbam. adhitthaheyya ce, 
&patti dukkstasså "ti. 1101261 


tens kho pana samayena afiflataro bhikkhu tadah’ uposathe 
&pattim &penno hoti. atha kho tassa bhikkhuno etad 
&hosi: bhagavatå pafiflattam na såpattikene uposatho kå- 
tabbo ’ti, аһай о’ amhi Apattim åpanno. katham nu kho 
mayå patipajjitabban ti. bheguvato etam attham årocesum. 
idha pena bhikkhave bhikkho tadah’ uposathe åpattim 
&panno hoti. tena bhikkhave bhikkhunå ekam bhikkhum 
upasarnkamitvå ekameam uttaråsaigam koritvà ukkutikam 


196 MAHÅVAGGA. [U. 87. 1-6, 


nistditvå afijalim peggahetvå evam assa vacaniyo: sham 
åvuso itthannåmam Apattim åpanno, tam patidesemtti, tena 
vattabbo : passasiti. ama pessåmiti. yatim samvareyyåsi- 
ti |l] idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu tadah’ uposathe 
åpattiyå vematiko hoti. tena bhikkhave bhikkhund 
ekam bhikkhum upasamkemitvå ekamsam . . . evam assa 
увсапіуо : aham åvuso itthannåmåya åpattiyå vematiko, yadå 
nibbematiko bhaviseåmi, tadá tam Apattim petikariesámiti 
vatvå uposatho kåtabbo patimokkham sotabbam, na tv eva 
tappaccayå uposathessa antaråyo kåtabbo ’ti. |2|| tena kho 
рапа samayena ohabbaggiyå bbikkbå sabbågam ápattim 
dementi. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. na bhikkhave 
sabbéga Apatti desetabbå. yo deseyya, арені dukkatassá 
‘ti. tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiy& bhikkhû aa- 
bbågam åpettim pstigaphenti. bhagavato etam attham 
Arocesum. па bhikkhave sabhågå åpatti patiggahetabba. 
yo patiganhoyys, Apatti dukkatasså "ti. 3) tena kho 
pans samayena aññataro bhikkbu påtimokkhe uddissamåne 
Apattim sarati. stha kho tasaa bhikkhuno etad ahosi: 
bhagevatà pefifiattam na aipattikena uposatho kåtabbo 'ti, 
аһай oc’ emhi Apattim Ёраппо. ketham nu kho mays pati- 
pajjitabban ti. bhagavato etam attham drocesum. idhe 
pana bhikkhave bhikkhu påtimokkhe uddissamåne åpattim 
sarati. tena bhikkhave bhikkhun& såmantå bhikkhu evam 
assa vacaniyo: aham ñvuso itthannåmam åpettim åpenno, 
ito vutthahitvå tam &pattim patikarissAmiti vatvå uposatho 
kåtabbo pAtimokkham sotabbam, na tv eva tappsocayå 
uposathassa antaråyo kåtabbo. |141 idha pana bhikkhave 
bhikkhu påtimokkhe uddissamåne åpattiyå vemati- 
ko hoti. tens bhikkhave bhikkhun& såmanté bhikkhu 
evam assa vacantyo: aham åvuso itthannåmåya Apattiyé 
vematiko, yadá nibbematiko bhavissåmi, tadå tam åpattim 
petikarissåmiti vatvå uposatho kåtabbo påtimokkham во- 
tabbam, na tv eva tappaccay& uposathassa antaråyo kåtabbo 
"ti. [5] tena kho репа samayena aiifatarasmim åvåse tadah’ 
uposathe aabbo samgho sabhA4gam åpsttim ápanno hoti, 
atha kho бават bbikkhünam etad shoei: bhagavaté раййа- 
ttam na sabhågå Gpatti desetabbå, na sabhågå Apatti patigga- 


П. 87. 6-11.] MAHÁYAGOA. 127 


hetabbå "ti, ауай ca eabbo samgho sabbågarn Apattim åpanno. 
katham nu kho amhehi patipajjitabban ti. bhagavato etam 
attham årocesum. idha pana bhikkhave aññatarasmim åvåse 
tadah’ uposathe sabbo samgho esbhAgam Apattim Apanno ho- 
ti. tehi bhikkhave bhikkhühi eko bhikkhu såmantå åvåså 
mjjukam pAhetabbo gacchåvuso tam Apattim patikaritva 

mayam te santike Apattim patikarissåmå ’ti. [6 
evafi co tam labhetha, ice etam kusalam, no ce labhetha, 
vyattena bhikkhuná patibelena samgbo fi&petabbo: sunåtu 
me bhante samgho. ayam ssbbo eumgho sabbågam Apattim 
Apanno. yedà aññam bhikkhum suddham an&pattikam pa- 
euienati, tadå tassa santike tam Apattim petikariseatiti vatvà 
uposatho kAtabbo pátimokkham uddisitabbam, na tv eva 
tappaccayé uposathsssa antaråyo kAtabbo. |711 idha pana 
bhikkhave aiifiatarasmim &váse tadah’ uposathe sabbo samgho 
sabhagdya åpattiyå vematiko hoti vyattena bhi- 
kkhunå patibalena samgho fiåpetsbbo: sup&tu me bhante 
samgho. ayam sabbo samgho sabhågåya Apattiyé vematiko, 
yadå nibbematiko bhevissati, (айд tam &pettim petikarissati- 
ti vatvå uposatho kåtabbo pátimokkhem uddisitabbam, na tv 
eva tappaccay& uposathassa antaråyo kátabbo. ||8|| idba 
pens bhikkhave afifiatarasmim Åvåse vassupageto samgho 
sabhigam Apattim panno hoti. tehi bhikkhave bhi- 
kkhühi eko bhikkhu . . . (=$ 6. 7) . . . no ce labbetha, 
eko bhikkhu sattåhakålikeam påbetabbo gacohåvuso tam åpe- 
ttim patikaritvA Agecoha, mayam te santike tam Apattim 
patikarissåmå ‘ti |9|| teua kho pana samayena aññatara- 
swim åvåse sabbo samgho sabhigam Apettim Apanno hoti, so 
пе jánáti tasså åpattiyå nåmem gottam. tatth’ аййо 
bbikkhu Agacchati bahuasuto ågatågamo dhammadharo vina- 
yadharo måtikådharo pandito vyatto medháv! lajji kukkucca- 
ko sikkhåkåmo, tam enam afifiataro bhikkhu yena so bhikkhu 
ten’ upasarpkami, upasarnksmitvå tam bhikkhum etad avoca: 
yo nu kho åvuso evañ с’ evañ ca karoti, kim nåma so Apattim 
Apajjatiti. [[10]] so evam Aha: yo kho åvuso evafi о’ evañ ca 
karoti, imam пЁфша so Apattim åpsjjeti. imam nåma (тат 
&vuso åpattim åpanno petikarohi tam épattin ti. во evam 
áha: na kho sham åvuso eko ‘та imam Apattim Apanno, ayam 


198 MAHÅVAGGA. (11. 97 11-29. 1. 


eabbo samgho imam åpattim Apanno 'ti. во evam dha: kin 
te Åvuso karissati paro åpanno vå anåpanno vå. ifigha tvam 
åvuso sakåya Apattiyd vutthabå "ti. [111 atha kho so bhi- 
kkhu tassa bhikkhuno vacanens tam åpattim patikaritvå 
yena te bhikkhü ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvA te bhi- 
kkhü etad avoca: yo kira åvuso evañ с’ evañ ca karoti, 
imam nåma so Åpattim Apajjati. imam nåma tumhe Avuso 
Apattim åpannå patikerothe tam åpattin ti. atha kho te 
bhikkhQ na iochimsu tassa bhikkhuno vacanens tam åpattim 
patikAtum. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. ([12|| idha 
pana bhikkhave afifiatarasmim Avise sabbo samgho sabhigam 
Apattim Åpanno hoti, so na jünáti tasså åpettiyå nimam 
gottam. tatth’ afifio bbikkhu ågacchati bahussuto . . . sikkhå- 
kåmo, tam enam aññataro bhikkhu yena so bbikkhu ten’ 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvá tam bhikkhum evam vadeti: 
yo nu kho åvuso evañ с’ evañ ca karoti kim n&ma eo åpattim 
Apajjatiti. ||13|| во evam vadeti: yo kho Avuso етай o 
өтай ca karoti, imam nama so åpattim åpejjati. imam nama 
{таш åvuso åpattim åpanno petikerohi tam Gpattin ti. во 
evam vadeti: na kho aham ávuso eko 'va imam ápattim 
åpanno, ayam sabbo samgho imam åpattim Apanno "ti. so 
evam vadeti: kin te Avuso karissati paro ápanno và anápanno 
vá. ifgha tvam åvuso sakåya Apattiyé vutthahá Ы. [|14] 
so ce bhikkhave bhikkhu tassa bhikkhuno vacanena tam 
Apattim patikaritvå yena te bhikkhü ten’ upasamkami, upa- 
eamkamitvé te bhikkhü өтет vadeti: yo kira åvuso evañ с 
evañ ca karoti, imam n&ma so Apattim åpsjjeti, imam nåma 
tumhe Avuso åpattim Åpannå petikerotha tam Apattin ti, te 
ce bhikkhave bhikkhü tasss bhikkhuno vacanena tam åpattim 
petikereyyum, ioo etam kusalam, no ce pafikareyyum, 
na te bhikkhave bbikkhü tena bhikkhuná akåmå vacanty& 
"ti. 1151271 
Codandvatthubhénavéram nitthitam. 


tena kho pana samayena afiflatarasmim åvåse tadah’ upo- 
sathe sambehulà åvåsikå bhikkhü sannipetimsu cattáro vå 
atirekå уй, te na jánimsu atth' aññe &vümk& bhikkhü an&gatà 


и. 29. 1-5.] MAHAVAGGA. 129 


"ti. te dhammasafiflino vineyasafifiino vaggå ssmaggasatifii- 
no uposatham akamsu pátimokkham uddisimsu. tehi uddi- 
ssamåne pátimokkhe ath’ аййе åvåsikå bhikkht &gacohimsu 
bahutarå. bhsgavato etam attham Arocesum ||| idba 
pana bhikkhave afifiatarasmim åvåse tadah’ uposathe samba- 
hulå åvåsikå bhikkhü sannipetanti cattáro vå atirekå và, te 
na jánanti etth' аййе åvåsikå bhikkhü anágatá 'ti. te 
dbhammasafilino vinayasafiflino vaggå samaggasafiflino upo- 
satham karonti påtimokkham uddisanti tehi uddissa- 
måne pátimokkhe ath’ afifie åvåsikå bbikkhü &gscchanti 
bahutará. tehi bhikkhave bhikkhühi puna påtimokkbam 
uddisitabbam, uddesakånam anåpatti. |2|| idha pana bhi- 
kkhave afifiatarasmim åvåse tadah’ uposathe . . . (=§ 2) 
«++ tehi uddissamåne patimokkhe ath’ afifie Avásiká bhi- 
kkhü &gacchanti samasamå. uddittham suddittham, avo- 
sesam sotsbbam, uddesskánam anåpatti. idha pena bhi- 
kkhave afifiatarasmim åvåse tadah’ uposathe . . . (§ 2)... 
tehi uddissamåne påtimokkhe ath’ afifle Avdsiké bbikkht 
Agacchanti thokatar&.  uddittham suddittham, avasesam 
sotabbam, uddesakånam anápatti. ||3|| idha pana bhikkhave 
aiifiatarasmim åvåse tadah’ uposathe . . . tehi uddittha- 
matte påtimokkbe ath’ afifie Avasika bhikkhà Agacohanti 
bahutarå. tehi bhikkhave bhikkhühi puna påtimokkham 
uddisitabbam, uddesakånam an&patti. idha pana bhikkbave 
afifiatarasmim åvåse tadah’ upoeathe . . . tehi uddittha- 
matte påtimokkhe ath’ afifle AvdsikA bhikkht Agacchanti 
samasamå.  uddittham suddittham, tesam santike påri- 
suddhi &rocetabbå, uddesakånam anåpetti. idha pana bhi- 
kkhave aññatarasmim åvåse tadah’ upoeathe . . . tehi uddi- 
tthamatte påtimokkbe ath’ аййе ñvàsiká bhikkhd agac- 
chanti thokatar&. uddittham suddittham, teeam santike 
pårisuddhi årocetabbå, uddesakAnam anåpatti. |41 idha pana 
bhikkhave afifiatarasmim &våse tadah’ uposathe . . . tehi ud di- 
tthamatte påtimokkhe avutthit&ya perieåya ath’ аййе 
Avåsikå bhikkhü ågaechanti bahutarå. tehi bhikkhave bhi- 
kkhfibi puns påtimokkham uddisitabbam, uddesskånam an&- 
patti. idhe pana bhikkhave aññatarasmim åvåse tadah’ upo- 
sathe . . . tehi udditthamatte pütimokkhe avutthi- 
vo, ш. 9 


130 š MAHÅVAGGA. (п. 38. 6-89. 3. 


thya parisåya ath’ afifie åvåsikå bhikkhü agacchanti sama- 
s&má. uddittham suddittham, tesam santike pårisuddhi 
årooetabbå, uddesakánam anåpetti. idha pana bhikkhave 
afifiatarasmim Avåse tadah’ uposathe . . . tehi uddittha- 
` matte påtimokkhe avutthitáya parisåya ath’ аййе åvåsikå 
bhikkhü Agacchanti thokatará.  uddittham suddittham, 
tesam santike pårisuddhi årocetabbå, uddesakånam anåpatti. 
5} idha pans bhikkhave afiflatarasmim уйле tadah’ upo- 
sathe . . . tehi udditthamatte påtimokkhe екасоёув 
vutthitåya parisåya ath’ afifie åvåsikå bhikkhü ågacohanti 
bahutarå. tehi bhikkhave . . . (=§5)...,... eka- 
ccåya vutthitya parisåya . . . samesamå .. .,.. . ekaccá- 
ya vutthitáya paris&ya . . . thokatará ... . |16 idha pana 
bhikkhave afifiatarasmim åvåse tadah’ upoeathe .. . tebi 
udditthamatte pátimokkhe sabbåya vutthitåya pari- 
sáya ath’ afifie åvåsikå bhikkhüà Agacchanti bahutarå , . . 
samasamá . .. thoketará . . . (=§ 6)... 7] 
andpattipannarasakam pnitthitam. |28] 


idha pena bhikkhave afifiatarasmim &váse tadah’ upoesthe 
sambahulå åvåsikå bhikkhQ sanpipatenti cattåro vA atireká 
vå, te jánanti atth’ аййе åvåsikå bhikkhü andgaté 'ti. te 
dbammasafifiino vinsyasafiflino vaggå vaggasafiflino uposn- 
them karonti påtimokkham uddisanti. tebi uddiesemáne 
påtimokkhe ath’ аййе &v&sik& bhikkhi &gacchanti bahu- 
tarå. tebi bhikkhave bhikkühi puna påtimokkham uddisi- 
tabbarn, uddesakånam åpstti dukkataasa. |111 idha pans 
bhikkhave aiifiatarasmim &váse tadah’ uposathe . . . (=$ 1) 

. + thi uddissamáne påtimokkhe ath’ аййе AvAsikA bhi- 
kkhü ágacchanti samasemå. uddittham suddittham, ava- 
векат sotabbam, uddesakånam &patti dukkatassa. idha pana 
bhikkhave afifletarasmim åvåse tadah’ uposatbe . . . (=$ 1) 
+++ tebi uddissamáne pátimokkhe ath’ afifie åvåsikå bhi- 
kkhå ágacchanti tbokaterå. uddittham suddittham, avese- 
sam sotabbam, uddesakånam patti dukkstassa. ||2]| idha 
рапа bhikkhave afiflatarasmim åvåse tadah’ uposathe . . . 
tehi udditthamatte påtimokkhe — ghe — avuttbitåys pari- 
såya — la — ekaccdya vutthitáya parisåya — la — sabbåya 


IL. 99. 3-39. 1.) MAHÅVAGGA. 131 


vwutthitàya perisåye ath’ afifie åvåsikå bbikkbå dgacchanti 
bahutarå — la — samasamå — la — thokatará. uddittham 
suddittham, tesam santike pårisuddhi &rocetabbá, uddesakå- 
nam Apatti dukketassa. ||3 || 

vaggávaggasafifiinopannarasakam nitthitam. 29) 


idha pana bhikkhave afiüetaresmim &váse tadah’ upoeathe 
sambehulá åvåsikå bhikkhà sannipatanti cattáro và atireká 
và, te jånanti atth’ aññe Avåsikå bhikkhü anågatå 'ti. te 
kappati nu kho ambåkam uposatho kAtum па nu kho kappa- 
titi vematikå uposatham karonti påtimokkbam uddisanti. 
tehi uddieeamåne pátimokkhe ath’ aññe Avåsikå bhikkhü 
Agacchenti bebuterå. tehi bhikkhave bhikkhühi puna 
pátimokkham uddisitabbam, uddesakånam Apatti dukkatassa. 
ily idhs pana . . . (comp. П. 29. 2. 3) . . . uddesakånam 
Apatti dokkatassa. 12 || 

vematikápannarasskam nitthitam. |80] 


idha pana bbikkhave aññatarasmim åvåse tadah’ upoeathe 
eambehulé åvåsikå bhikkhü sannipatanti cattáro và atireké 
va, te jánanti atth’ айде &vüásikà bhikkhü anågatå ’ti te 
kappat" eva amhåkam uposatho kåtum, n’ amhåkam na 
kappattti kukkucoapakatå uposstham karonti påtimo- 
kkbam uddisanti. tebi uddissamáne påtimokkhe ath’ 
afifie åvåsikå bhikkhü &gacohanti bahuterå. tehi bhi- 
kkhave bhikkhühi pone påtimokkham uddisitabbam, udde- 
sakfinam åpetti dukkatassa. j li idha pana . . . (comp. II. 
99. 2.3) . . . uddesakånam &patti dukkatassa. |í? l| 

kukkuccapskatápannarasakem nitthitam. 1811 


idha pana bhikkhave afifiatarasmim åvåse tadah’ uposathe 
sambehulà åvåsikå bhikkhü sannipatanti cattåro và stirekå 
và, te jånanti atth' afifie åvåsikå bhikkhü anågatå 'ti. te 
nassante te vinassante te ko tehi attho ‘ti bhedapure- 
kkhårå uposstham keronti påtimokkham uddimanti. tebi 
uddissamåne påtimokkhe ath’ аййе åvåsikå bhikkh( åga- 
ochanti bahuterå. tehi bhikkhave bhikkhühi puna páti- 
mokkham uddisitabbam, uddesakAnam Apatti thullacoa- 


139 MAHAVAGGA. [II. 89. 1-34. 4. 


yasse. |11 idha pana . . . (comp. П. 29. 2, 3; instead of 

Apatti dukkatassa read Apatti thullaccayassa) . . . dpatti thu- 

Uaccayassa. |2 | 

bhedepurekkhåråpennaressakam nitthitam. 1892) 
` pafloasattatikam nittbitam. 


idha pana bhikkhave afifiatarasmim Åvåse tadah’ uposathe 
sambahulå åvåsikå bhikkhü sannipatanti cattåro vå atirekå 
vå, te jånanti afifle åvåsikå bhikkhü antoeimam okka- 
mantiti. te jånenti aññe åvåsikå bhikkhü antosimam 
okkantå 'ti te passanti afifle åvåsike bhikkhü antost- 
mam okkamante. te passanti вййе Avasike bhikkhü 
antosimam okkante. te supanti aññe Avåsikå bhikkhO 
antostmam okkamantiti. te sunanti аййе åvåsikå bhi- 
kkhü antosimam ок кеп ёа "ti. åvåsikena Avåsikå ekasa- 
tapaficasattati tikanayato, åvåsikena ågantukå, Agantukena 
Avasiké, ågantukena &gentuká, peyyålamukhena satta tikasa- 
tani honti. 111881 


idha pana bhikkhave åvåsikånam bhikkhünam cátuddaso 
hoti, ågantukånam pannaraso. sace Avåsikå bahutarå honti, 
&gantukehi 4vdsikAnam sauuvattitabbam. aace samasamå 
honti, ágantukehi AvasikAnam anuvattitabbam. васе ågantu- 
ka bahutará honti, åvåsikebi ågantukånam anuvattitabbam. 
111 idha pane bhikkhave åvåsikånam bhikkhünam panna- 
raso hoti, ågantukånam cåtuddaso. sace AvdsikA bahu- 
tarå honti, ågantukehi åvåsikånam enuvattitebbam. saco 
samasamá honti, Agantukehi &v&aikánam anuvattitabbam. 
aace fgantukå bahutarå honti, &vüsikehi ågantukånam anu- 
vattitabbam. [2| idha pana bhikkhave AvdsikAnam bhi- 
kkhünam påtipado hoti, ågantukånam pannaraso. васе 
åvåsikå babutar& honti, &vüsikehi ågantukånam nåkåmå då- 
tabbå s&maggi, Agantukehi nissimam gautvå uposatho kå- 
tabbo. sace samssamå honti, åvåsikehi ågantukånam nåkåmå 
dåtabbå såmaggi, Agantukehi nissimam gantvå uposatho kå- 
tabbo. sace ågantukå babutarå honti, åvåsikehi &gantuká- 
nam eåmaggi và dåtabbå nissimam vå gantabbam. ||3]| idha 
pana bhikkhave åvåaikånam bhikkhünam pannaraso hoti, 


IL 24. 4-9.] MAHÅVAGGA. 133 


fgantukAnam pátipado. sace åvåsikå behutarå honti, 
Agantukehi Avåsikånam s&meggi vi dåtabbå nissimam và 
gantabbam. sace samasamá honti, ågantukehi åvåsikånam 
såmaggi và dåtabbå nissimam vå gantabbam. васе ågantukå 
bahntarå honti, ågantukehi åvåsikånam nåkåmå dátabbá så- 
maggi, åvåsikehi nissimam gantvå uposatho kåtabbo. [|4 
idha pana bhikkhave ågantukå bhikkhů paesanti Avåsikå- 
nam bhikkhünam áváskáküram åvåsikalingam åvåsikeni- 
níittam åvåsikuddesam supafifiattam maficapitbam bhisibim- 
bohanam pániyam paribhojaniyam supstitthitam parivenam 
susammattham, passitvå vematikå honti atthi nu kho &v&- 
sikå bhikkhü п’ аы nu kho 'ti. 151 te vematiké na vici- 
nanti, avicinitvå uposatham karonti, åpatti dukkatame. te 
vematika vicinanti, vicinitvå na passanti, apassitvå uposa- 
tham karonti, anåpatti. te vemstikå vicinanti, vicinitvå 
passanti, passitvå ekato uposatham karonti, anåpatti. te ve- 
matika vicinanti, vicinitvå passanti, passitvå påtekkam upo- 
satham karonti, Apatti dukkatassa, te vematikå vicinanti, 
vicinitvå passanti, passitva nassante te vinassante te ko tehi 
attho 'ti bhedapurekkhårå uposatham karonti, Apatti thulla- 
ecayassa, |1611 idha pane bhikkhave Agantuké bhikkhd su- 
nanti AvasikAnam bbikkhûnam åvåsikåkåram Avdsikaliigam 
åvåsikanimittarn Avåaikuddesam cankemantánam padasaddam 
sajjháyasaddam okkåsitasaddam khipitasaddam, sutvà vema- 
tik& honti atthi nu kho Avåsikå bbikkhå n’ atthi nu kho 
"ü. te... (=8 6)... Apatti thullaocayasss. ||7|| idha 
pens bhikkhave åvåsikå bhikkhd passanti &gentukánam 
bhikkhünam ågantukåkåram Agantukaliigam dgantukani- 
mittam ågantukoddesam afifidtakam pettam afifidtakam civa- 
ram afifidtakam nistdanam pådånam dhotam udakanissekam, 
pamitvå vematikü honti atthi nu kho ågantukå bhikkhüà 
n’ вы nu kho ti. te... (= 6)... åpetti thullacca- 
yass. |81 idha pana bhikkhave Avåsikå bhikkhå svnanti 
&gantukánam bhikkhünam &gantuk&káram Agantukaliigam 
agentukanimittam ågantukuddesam ügacchantánam pada- 
saddam upåhanspeppothensssddam ukkåsitassddarn khipita- 
saddam, sutvå vematika honti atthi nu kho ågantukå 
bhikkhü n’ atthi nu kho ‘ti. te... (=§ 6)... Apatti 


134 MAHÁYAGGA. (01. 94. 9.35. 3. 


thullaccayasss. ||9|| idha pana bhikkhave &gantuká bhikkhü 

ti åvåsike bhikkhü nånåsamvåsske. te samána- 
samvásskaditthim petilabhanti, samánasamvüsakaditthim 
patilabhitvå na pucchanti, apuochitvå ekato uposatham ka- 
ronti, anåpatti. te puochanti, pucchitvå nåbhivitaranti, an- 
abhivitaritvå ekato uposatham karonti, åpatti dukkntasea. te 
pucchanti, puochitvå nåbbivitaranti, anabhivitaritvA páte- 
kkam uposatham keronti, en&patü. 11011 idha pana bhi- 
kkhave ågantukå bhikkhü passanti åvåsike bhikkhü samå- 
nasemvåsake. te nånåsamvåsekaditthim petila- 
bhanti, nånåsamvåsakeditthim patilabbitvå na puochanti, 
apuochitvå ekato uposatham karonti, Apatti dukkatassa te 
pucchanti, puochitvå abhivitaranti, abhivitaritvå pütekkam — 
upoeatham karonti, åpatti dukkatesss. te puochanti, pucchi- 
två abhivitaranti, abhivitaritvà ekato uposatham Кагопб, 
andpatti. 1111 idha pana bhikkhave Avdsiké bhikkhü pas- 
santi ågantuke bhikkhü nånåsamvåsske. te eamána- 
simvasakaditthim patilabhanti . . . (= 10)... anå- 
patti. 11211 idha pana bhikkhave Avåsikå bhikkhü passanti 
&gantuke bhikkhü samånesamvåsske. te nán&ásamvá- 
s&ákaditthim patilabhanti . . . (—8 11)... anåpatti. 
1131341 


` no bhikkhave tadah’ uposathe sabhikkhuké åvåså abhi- 
kkhuko åvåso gantabbo aññatra aamghene afifistra antaråyå. 
na bhikkhave tadah’ aposathe sabhikkbukå åvåså abhikkhu- 
ko anåvåso gantabbo afiflatra samghens afifiatre antaråyå. 
na bhikkhave tadah’ uposathe sabhikkhuk& åvåså abhikkhu- 
ko Avdso và anåvåso vá gantabbo afifiatra samghena aflilatra 
antaráyá. |11 ne bhikkhave tadah’ upossthe sabbikkhukå 
anåvåsk abhikkhuko åvåso gantabbo afiflatra samghens afiila- 
tra antaråyå. na bhikkhave tadah’ uposatbe sabbikkboké 
anåvåså ebhikkhuko anåvåso gantabbo afifiatra samghens 
aililatra antaråyå. na bhikkhave tadah’ uposathe ssbhikkhu- 
kå anåvåsk abhikkhuko Aviso và anåvåso vå gantabbo afifla- 
tra samghena aññatra antaråyå. |2 na bhikkhave tadah’ 
uposathe sabbikkhukå åvåså và anåvåså vA abbikkhuko åvå- 
so gantabbo afiflatra samghena afiflatra anteråyå. na bhi- 


IL 35. 3-88. 3.) MAHÅVAGGA. 135 


kkhave tadah’ uposathe esbhikkhuka åvåså và anåvåså vå 
abhikkhuko anåvåso gantabbo afiflatra samghena aññatra an- 
taråyå. na bhikkhave tadah’ uposathe eabhikkhuké åvåsk và 
anåvåså và abhikkhuko Aviso và anåvåso và gantabbo afifiatra 
samghena afifiatra antaråyå. || 3|| na bhikkhave tadah’ uposathe 
eabhikkhuka åvåså sabhikkhuko Aviso gantabbo yatth’ 
assu bhikkhü nånåsamvåeskå аййа{га samghens аййа- 
tra antaråyå. па bhikkave tadah’ uposathe sabhikkhuká åvåså4 
sabhikkhuko andviso gantsbbo yatth’ assu bbikkhü nánà- 
samvåsakå afifiatra samghena annatre antaråyå. na bhi- 
kkbave tadah’ uposathe sabhikkhuká åvåså søbhikkbuko åvå- 
ao và anüváso vå . . . (сотр. 5 1, 2, 3) . . . na bhikkhave 
tadah’ uposathe sabhikkhukA Avåså vA anåvåså vå sabbikkhu- 
ko Avaso vå anåvåso vå gantabbo yatth’ assu bhikkhü nånå- 
samvåsakå aññatra samgbens afifiatra antaråyå. ||4|| gan- 
tabbo bhikkhave tadah’ uposathe sabhikkhukå åvåså 
eabhikkhuko åvåso yatth' assu bhikkhü samånesamvåsakå, 
yam }аййА sakkomi ajj’ eva gantun ti. gantabbo bhikkhave 
tadah’ upossthe sebbikkbukå &våså sabbikkhuko enåvåso 
yatth’ assu bhikkhû eamAnasamvisakA, yam jaññá sakkomi 
ajj’ eva gantun ti . . . gantabbo bhikkhave tadah’ uposathe 
sabhikkhukA åvåså và anåvåså và sabbikkhuko Aviso và an&- 
vaso và yatth’ assu bhikkhü samánasamvüsaká, yam jafifià 
eakkomi ejj’ eva gantun ti. 151851 


ne bbikkbave bhikkhuniy4 nisinnaperisáya påtimo- 
kkhem uddisitabbam. yo uddiseyya, Apatti dukkatassa. 
— la — na bhikkhave sikkhamånåye, na: såmanerass, na 
såmaneriyå, na aikkham paocakkbåtakassa, na antimavatthum 
ajjhápannakassa nisinnaperisåya påtimokkham uddisitabbam. 
yo uddiseyye, åpatti dukkatasss. |11 na åpettiyå adassane 
ukkhittakessa nisinnaparisåya påtimokkham uddisitabbam. 
yo uddiseyys, yathådhammo kåretsbbo. па ApattiyA appati- 
kamme ukkhittakassa nisinnaperisåye, па pápikAya dittbiyå 
appatinissagge ukkhittakessa піліппарагівдуа påtimokkham 
uddisitabbam. уо uddiseyya, yathádhammo káretabbo. ||2|| 
ne pandakasss nisinnaperisåya påtimokkham uddisitabbam. 
yo uddiseyya, åpatti dukkatasss. па theyyasamvisakassa 


136 MAHÁYAGGA. [IL 86. 3-4. 


— la — na titthiyspakkantakasss, па tiraochånegatassa, ne 
måtughåtakesså, na pitughåtakessa, na arabantagbåtakasse, 
na bhikkhunidüsakessa, ne samghabhedekassa, ns lohituppå- 
dakassa, na ubhatovyafijenskassa nisinnaparisdya påtimo- 
kkham uddisitabbam. yo uddiseyya, åpetti dukkatassa. ||3[] na 
bhikkhave parivasiknssa pårisuddhidånene upoeatho kåtabbo 
aññatra avutthitåya perisåya. na ca bhikkhave anupoeathe 
uposatho kAtabbo аййа{та eamgbesåmaggiyå "ti. |14 119611 
uposathakkhandhake tatiyam bhånavåram. 


imasmim khandhake vatthu chaasiti, tassa uddánam : 
titthiyå Bimbisåro ca, sannipatanti tunhiké, 
dhammam, raho, påtimokkham, devasikam, tadå sakirn,| 
yatbåparisåya, eamaggam, såmaggi, Maddakucchi ca, 
simå, mahati, nadiyå, anu, dve, khuddakåni ca,| 
navå, Rájagahe o’ eva, simå avippavåsanå, 
sammanne pathamam simam pacché simam samübane,| 
asammatå gåmasimå, nadiyå samudde sare 
udakukkbepo, bbindanti, tath’ ev’ ajjhottharanti ca,| 
kati, kammåni, uddeso, savarå, asati pi ca, 

6 dhamman, vinayam, tajjenti, puna vinaya-tajjanå,| 
codan&, kate okåse, adhamma-patikkosanå, 
catupaficapará, Avi, saficioca, ce pi våyame,| 
sagabattbå, anajjhitthà, Codanamhi, па jånati, 
sambahulá ne jånanti, sajjukam, na ca gacchare,| 
katimi, kivatiká, düre Arocetufl ca, na ssari, 
uklåpam, åsanam, padipo, diså, añño bahussuto,| 
sajjukam, vassuposatho, suddhikammafi ca, fidtakA, 
Gaggo, cata-tayo, dve-'ko, Apstti, ssbhágé, sari,| 
sabbo samgho, vematiko, na jånanti, babussuto, 

10 bahú, samasamå, thoká, parisáya avuttbitåys са,| 
ekaccá vuttbitå, sabbå, jánanti ca, vematikA, 
kappat' eva "ti kukkuccá, jånam, passam, sunanti ca, | 
Avåsikenn Agantu, cåtupannaraso puna, 
påtipado pannaraso, liigasamvåsakå ubho,| 
pårivåsånuposatbo, afifistra samghasåmaggiyå. 
ete vibhattå uddånå vatthuvibhütakáraná Ы. 


MAHAVAGGA. 
п. 


Tena samayena buddho bhagavå Råjagahe viharati Ve- 
]uvane Kalandakanivipe. tena kho pana samayens 
bhagavatå bhikkhünam vassåvåso apafifiatto hoti. te ‘dha 
bhikkhü hemantam pi gimham pi vassam pi cårikam caranti. 
lj manusså ujjháyanti khtysnti vipácenti: katham hi 
nÀma samana Sakyaputtiyå hemantam pi gimham pi vassam 
pi cårikam carissanti haritáni tinåni sammaddantå ekindri- 
yam jivam vihethentà bahü khuddake pine samghåtam åpå- 
dentå. ime hi nåma afiflatitthiyå durakkhátadhammá vasså- 
våsam alliyissanti samkåpeyissanti, ime hi náma sakuntakå 
rukkhaggesu kulAvakAni karitvå vassåvåsam alliyissanti sam- 
kápayissanti, ime pana samaņå Sakyaputtiyå hemantam pi 
gimham pi vasam pi cårikam caranti haritåni tináni samma- 
ddantå ekindriyam jtvam vihethentå bahû khuddake påne 
samghátam åpådentå 'ti. |2|| assosum kho bhikkhü tesam 
manussánam  ujjbáyantànem khiyantinam vipåcentånam. 
stha kho te bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham érocesum. atha 
kho bhagavá etasmim nidåne etasmim pakarane dhammika- 
tham katvå bhikkhü åmantesi: anujánámi bhikkhave va- 
ssam upagantun ti. ||3 11]! 


atha kho bbikkhünam etad ehosi: kadá nu kho vassam 
upegantabben ti. bhagavato etam attham frocesum. anu- 
jéadmi bhikkhave vassáne vasam upagantun ti. [|1|| atha 
kho bhikkhünam etad вћові: kati nu kho vassupanåyikå ’ti. 
bhagavato etam attham årocesum. dve ”må bhikkhave va- 
ssupanüyik& purimik& pacchimiké 'ti. eparsjjugatàya 
Aså]biyå purimikå upsgantabbá, måssgatåya åså]hiyå pacchi- 
mikå upsgantsbbå. imå kho bbikkhave dve vassupanåyikå 
"ti, 12191 


138 MAHÅVAGGA. (11. 3. 14. 


tena kho pana samayens ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü vassam 
upagantvå entarå vassam cárikam caranti. manusså ujjbå- 
yanti khiyanti vipåoenti: katham bi náma ssmanå Sakya- 
puttiyå hemantam pi gimham pi vasssm pi cårikam cari- 
авап haritáni tipåni sammaddantå ekindriyam jtvam vihe- 
thentå bahd khuddake pAne samghåtam åpådentå. ime hi 
nåma afiflatitthiyé durakkhåtsdhemmå vassåvåsam alliyis- 
santi samkApayiesanti, ime hi náma eakuntaká rukkhaggesu 
kulávakáni karitvå vassåvåsam alliyissanti samkåpeyissanti, 
ime pana samanå fakyaputtiyà hemantam pi gimham pi 
vasam рі cÅrikam caranti haritáni tipåni sammaddantá 
ekindriyam jivam vihethentá bahü khuddske pane samghå- 
tam åpådentå ”ti. ||1|| &ssosum kho bhikkhf tesam manusså- 
nam ujjh4yantanam khiyanténam vip&oentánam. уе te bhi- 
kkhå appiocbå te ujjhåyanti khiyanti vip&centi: katham hi 
nåma chabbaggiyå bhikkhü vassam upagantvå antarå vassam 
oårikam carissantiti. atha kho te bbikkhå bhagavato etam 
attham árocesum. atha kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne etas- 
mim pakarane dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü &ámantesi: na 
bhikkhave vassam upagentvå purimam vå temåeam 
paochimam vå temåsam avasitvé cårikå pakkamitabbå. 


yo pakkameyya, åpatti dukketasså 'ti. || 2 || 3 | 


tena kho pana samayena ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü na 
icchanti vassam upagantum. bhagavato etam attham åro- 
cesum. nå bhikkhave vassam na upagantabbem. yo 
na upagaccheyya, åpatti dukkatasså "ti. |1|| tena kho pana 
samayena ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü tadahu vassupanåyikåye 
vasam anupagantukåmå saficicoa Åvåsam atikkamanti. bha- 
gavato etam attham ároocsum. па bhikkhave tadahu vassupa- 
nåyikåye vasam anupagantuk&mena вайоїоса Aviso stikka- 
mitabbo. yo atikkameyya, åpetti dukkatasså 'ti. ||2|| tena 
kho pana samayena råjå Mågsdho Seniyo Bimbisåro 
vasam ukkaddhitukåmo bhikkhünsm santike dütam påhesi, 
yadi pan’ ayyå ågame junhe vassam upagaccheyyun ti. bha- 
gavato etam attham årocesum : enuján&mi bhikkhave råjf- 
nam anuvattitun ti. 1314] 


ш. 8. 1-6.] MAHAVAGGA. 139 


atha kho bhagavà Råjagahe yathåbhirantam viharitv& 
yana Bávatthi tena cårikam pakkåmi. snupubbens oári- 
kam caramåno yena Bávatthi tad avasari. tatra sudam bha- 
gavå Bávatihiyam viharati Jetavane ÅAnåthapipdikanem 
frame. tena kho pana samayena Kosalesu janapadesn 
Udenens upåsakena samgham uddisss viharo kåråpito 
hoti. so bhikkhünam santike dütam påhesi, &gaoohantu 
bhaddantå, iochåmi dánafi ca dátum dhammafi ca sotum bhi- 
kkhü ca passitun ti. 11] bhikkhü evam áhamsu: bhaga- 
vatå åvuso pefliattam ne vassam upagantvá purimam vá 
temåsam peochimam và temásam avusitvà cårikå pakkami- 
tabba ‘ti. Agameta Udeno upåsako yåva bhikkhü vassam 
vasanti, vassam vuttbå gamissanti. весе pan’ ama aocáyikam 
karaniyam, tatth' eva Avåzikånam bhikkhünam santike vihå- 
ram patitthåpetå "ti. |21 Udeno upåsako ujjbåyati khtyati 
vipåoeti : katham Ы nåms bhaddantå mayå pahite na ága- 
echissanti, aham hi dáyako kårako samghupetthåko ”ti. asso- 
sum kho bhikkhü Udenassa upásakassa ujjbdyentassa kbi- 
yantama vipåcentassa. atha kho te bhikkhü bhagavato etam 
attham årocesum. |131 atha kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne 
dhammiketham katvå bhikkhQ Amantesi: snujánàmi bhi- 
kkhave ssttannam satt&hekerapiyona pahite gantum, na 
tv eva appahite, bhikkhusss bhikkbuniy& sikkhamånåye så- 
manerassa såmaneriyå upåsakasm upásikéys.  anujánámi 
bhikkhave imesam sattannam ssttåhakaraniyene pahite gan- 
tum, na tv eve appahite. sattdham sannivatto kAtabbo. || 41) 
idha pana bhikkhave upåsekena samgham uddissa vihåro 
kåråpito hoti. so ce bhikkhfinam santike dütam pahineyya, 
&gacchanta bhaddantá, iochámi dånafi ca dátum dhammafi ca 
sotum bhikkhü ca pasaitun ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattåhe- 
Кагаріуепа pahite, na tv eva appahite. sattåham sannivatto 
kåtabbo. 1511 idha pana bhikkhave up&sakena samgham 
uddissa addhayogo kåråpito hoti, påsådo kåråpito hoti, hammi- 
yam kåråpitam h., guhå kåråpitå h., parivenam kåråpitam 
h., kotthako kåråpito h., upatthånasålå kåråpitå h., aggisålå 
kåråpitå h., kappiyskuti kåråpitå h., vaocakuti kåråpitå h., 
cankamo kåråpito h., cankamanssålå kåråpitå h., udspåno 
kåråpito h., udapánasálà kåråpitå h., jantågharam kåråpi- 


140 MAHÅVAGGA. (ІІ. 8. 6-9. 


tam b., jantågharasålå kåråpitå h., pokkharani kåråpitå h., 
mandapo kåråpito Һ., åråmo kåråpito b., åråmavatthum kå- 
råpitam hoti. so ce bhikkhünam santike dütam pahineyya, 
ågaochantu bheddantå, iochümi dánafi ca datum dhammaí ca 
sotum bhikkhü ca passitun ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattåhe- 
karaniyena pahite, na tv ova appsbite. sattåham sannivatto 
kátabbo. |6| idhe pana bhikkhave upåsakena samba- 
hule bhikkhü uddisa — la — екет bhikkhum uddi- 
ssa vihåro kåråpito h., addheyogo k. h., påsådo k. h. ... 
(=$ 6) . . . sattdham sannivatto kåtabbo. ||7(| idha pana 
bhikkhave upåsekena bhikkhunissmghsm uddissa 
— la — sambahulá bhikkhaniyo uddisss — 18 — okam 
bhikkhunim uddisss — la — sambabulé sikkhamáná- 
yo uddissa — la — ekam sikkhamånam nddissa — la — 
sambehule eAmanere uddissa — la — ekam såmane- 
ram uddiea — la — sambahulá såmeneriyo uddiasa 
—la— ekam såmenerim uddisss vibåro kåråpito hoti, 
addhayogo k. h., påsådo k. h., hsmmiyam k. h., gubé k. h., 
pariveņam k. h., kotthako К. h., npattbånasålå k. b., aggiså- 
А К. h., kappiyakuțt k. h., cankamo k. h., cafikamanasålg 
k. h., udapåno k. h., udapánasñlá k. h., pokkharant k. hb., 
mandapo k. h., åråmo k. h., âråmavatthum k. hoti so ce 
bhikkhûnam santike dûtam pehineyys, Адаооһапба bha- 
ddant4, iochimi dánafi ca datum dhammañ са sotum bbikkhà 
са passitun Ч, gantabbam bhikkhave sattdhakerantyens pa- 
hite, na tv eva appahite. sattdham sannivatto kAtabbo. ||8|| 
idha pena bhikkhave upAsakena attano atthåya nivema- 
nam kåråpitam hoti — la — sayanigharam k. h., uddosito 
k. h., atto k. b., malo k. h., åpano k. h., &panasá]A k. h., på- 
sådo k. h., hammiyam k. h., guhá k. h., perivenam k. b., 
kotthako k. h., upetthånasålå k. h., aggisålå k. h., rasavati 
k. h., vaccakatt k. h., cañkamo k. h., сапуашлпалА k. h., 
udapåno k. h., udapånasålk k. h., jantaghsram k. h., jantá- 
gharasålå k. h., pokkherani k. h., mapdapo k. h., árámo k. h., 
Arâmavstthum k. h., puttassa vå våreyyam hoti, dhituyA và 
våreyyam hoti, giláno vå hoti, abbififiátam và suttantam bha- 
mati. so се bhikkhünam santike dütam pahineyya, ågaochantu 
bhaddanté imam enttantam periy&pupissanti pur’ Ayam su- 


Ш. 8. 9-13.] MAHÅVAGGA. ` 141 


ttanto palujjatiti. efiflataram vA pan’ assa kiocam hoti kara- 
piyam vA. во ce bhikkhünam mantike ditam pahineyya, 
Agacobantu bhaddantá, icchámi dánafi ca datum dhammafi os 
sotum bhikkhü ca pessitun ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattáha- 
Кагапіуепе pahite, na tv eva appahite. eattáham sannivatto 
kAtabbo. ||9|| idha pans bhikkhave upåsikåye samgham 
uddissa viháro kåråpito hoti. så ce bhikkhünam santike 
dütam pahineyya, ågacohantu ayyå, icohåmi dånan ca datum 
dhammafi са sotum bhikkhü са passitun ti, gantebbam bhi- 
kkhave satt&hakarapiyena pahite, na tv eva appahite, sattA- 
ham sannivetto kåtsbbo. |10] idha pana bhikkhave upå- 
sikáya samgham uddissa addhayogo kåråpito . . . (= $ 6) 
. + + åråmavatthum kåråpitam hoti. så oe bhikkhünam . . . 
(= 610)... aattdham sannivetto kátabbo. || 11|| idha pana 
bhikkhave upåsikåya sambahule bhikkhü uddisss — la — 
ekam bhikkhum uddissa — la — bhikkhuntsamgham uddissa 
— la — sambabulå bhikkhuniyo uddissa — la — ekam bhi- 
kkhunim uddissa — la — sambahulå sikkhamånåyo uddissa, 
ekam sikkhamánaem uddissa, sambehule såmanere uddisse, 
ekam såmaneram uddissa, sambehulá såmaneriyo uddissa, 
ekam simanerim uddissa — la — attano atthåys nivesanam 
kåråpitam hoti — la — sayanigharam kåråpitam hoti . . . 
(289)... gilånå vå hoti, abhififiétam vå suttantam bha- 
pati. så ce bhikkhünam santike dütam pehipeyys, åga- 
echanta ayyå imam euttantam pariyápupissanti pur’ Ayam 
suttanto palujjetiti. afifiataram vá pan’ asså kiocam hoti 
karanfyam vå. ef ce bhikkhünam santike dütam pehineyya, 
Agacchantu ayyå, iochámi danefi oa datum dhammañ ca so- 
tum bhikkhü ca passitun ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattåha- 
karaniyene pahite, na tv eve appahite. sattåbam sannivatto 
kátabbo.||]12| idhs pans bhikkhave bhikk bunå aamgham 
uddises, bbikkhuniyå samgham uddisse, sikkhamånå- 
ya samgham uddissa, såmanerena samgbam uddisss, så- 
maneriyå samgham uddissa, sambahule bhikkhü uddissa, 
ekam bhikkhum uddiesa, bhikkhunisamgham uddissa, samba- 
hula bhikkhuniyo uddissa, ekan bhikkhonim uddissa, samba- 
hulå sikkhemånåyo uddissa, ekam sikkhamånam uddisss, 
sambahule sámspere uddisse, ekam såmaneram піва, 


142 ` — MAHÅVAGGA. ПП. 8. 13-8. 5. 


eambehulA såmaneriyo uddiess, ekam såmanerim uddissa, 
attano atthåya vibåro kåråpito hoti . . . (= 88) . . . &r&- 
mávatthum kåråpitam hoti så ce bhikkhünam santike 
dütam pehineyye, ågacchantu syyå, icchámi dánafi oa då- 
tum dhammafi ca sotum bhikkhü ca passitun ti, gantabbam 
bhikkhave settåhakaraniyens pahite, na tv eva appahite. 
sattâham eannivatto kåtabbo 'ti. 113051 


tena kho pana samayens afifiataro bbikkhu gilåno hoti 
so bhikkünam santike dütam páhesi, aham bi gilåno, ága- 
echantu bhikkhü, icchámi bhikkhünam dgatan ti. bhagava- 
to etam attham &rocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave paficannam 
sattahakaraniyena appahite pi gantur, pag ova pahite, 
bhikkhussa bhikkhuniy& sikkhaméndya såmanerases sámane- 
riyå. anujånåmi bhikkhave imesam peficannam satt&haka- 
raniyena appehite pi gantum, pag evs pahite. sattdham 
sannivatto kåtsbbo. |11 idha pane bhikkhave bhikkhu 
gilåno hoti. во ce bhikkhünam santike dfitam pahi- 
neyya, sham hi gilåuo, dgecohantu bhikkhû, iochámi bhi- 
kkhünsm ågatan ti, gantabbem bhikkhave sattAhakarant- 
yena appahite pi, pag eva pahite, gilånabhattem vA pari- 
yesimámi, gildnupetthAkabhattam vå pariyesissámi, gilAna- 
bhesajjam vå pariyesissámi, puoohissåmi vA, upatthahissámi 
vå "t.  satthham sannivatto kåtabbo. |121 idha pana 
bhikkheve bhikkhusea anabhirati uppannå hoti. so oe 
bhikkhOnem aantike dütam pahineyya, anabhirati me uppa- 
под, Agacchantu bhikkht, icchAmi bhikkhünam Agatan ti, 
gantabbam bhikkhave sattdhakarantyena appehite pi, pag 
eva pahite, ansbhiratim vipakAscesimi vA vipakAstpessAmi 
và dhammakatham vássa karissámiti sattkham sannivatto 
kátabbo.||3|| idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhussa kukkuocam 
uppannam hoti. во ce bhikkhünam santike dütam pahi- 
пеуув, kukkuccam me uppannam, ágacchenta bhikkhü, 
iochámi bhikkhfinam ágatan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave satt4- 
hakarantyena appahite pi, pag eva pahite, kukkuocam vino- 
dessåmi vA vinodåpessåmi vá dhammekstham våssa karisså- 
шій. ættåbam sannivatto kåtabbo. |41 idha pana bhi- 
kkhave bhikkhussa ditthigatam uppannam hoti. so ce 


їп, @ 5-10.] MAHÅVAGGA. 143 


bhikkhünam eantike dütam pehinoyys, ditthigatam me uppa- 
nnam, Agacchanta bhikkhf, iochámi bhikkhünam Agatan ti, 
gantabbam bhikkhave sattåhekeraniyens appahite pi, pag 
eva pahite, ditthigatam vivecessAmi vå vivecåpessåmi vå 
dhammakatham våssa karissåmiti. sattåham sannivatto kå- 
tabbo. 1151 idha pana bhikkhave bbikkhu garudham- 
mam sjjhåpanno hoti parivåsåreho. во ce bhikkhünam 
santike dütam pahineyys, aham hi garudhammam ajjhåpanno 
parivåsåraho, &gaochantu bhikkhü, iochåmi bhikkhinam åga- 
tan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave ssttåbakeraniyena appahite pi, 
peg eve pahite, parivasadAnam ussukkam karissåmi vå, anu- 
snb vensámi vå, ganapürako vå bhavissåmiti. sattåham sanni- 
табо kAtabbo. [|6|| idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu máláya 
patikassanåraho hoti. so ce bhikkbünam santike dütam 
pahineyye, sham hi müláya patikassanåraho, Agacchanta 
bhikkhü, icchámi bhikkhünam ågatan ti, gantabbam bhi- 
kkhave sattåhakarapiyens appahite pi, pag eva pahite, 
målåya patikassanam ussokkam karissåmi vå, anuasivessAmi 
và, ganspårako vå bbavissámiti, sattáham sannivatto kå- 
tabbo. 171 idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu månattåreho 
hoti. so ce bhikkhünarm eantike dûtam pahineyye, aham hi 
månettåraho, ågacchantu bhikkhd, iochåmi bbikkhünam &ga- 
ten ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattahakarantyena appahite pi, 
pag eva pahite, mánattadánam ussukkam karissåmi vá, anu- 
eshveesimi vå, ganapårako vå bhaviasámiti. sattåham sanni- 
vatto kátabbo. ||8l| idha pana bhikkhave bbikkhu abbhå- 
nåreho hoti, во oe bhikkhünam santike dütam pahineyya, 
aham hi ebbhånårsho, Agacchanta bhikkhà, icoh&mi bhi- 
КЬ (пето ágstan ti, gantabbam bhikkheve sattåhakaraniyena 
appahite pi, pag eva pahite, abbhånam ussukkam karissA- 
mi vá, enussÁvessámi vå, ganapüreko vå bhavissámiti. 
eattáham sannivatto kåtabbo. |1911 idha pans bhikkhave 
bhikkhussa samgho kammam kattuk&mo hoti tajjani- 
yam vå nissayam vå pebbájaniyam vå patisåraniyam và 
ukkhepaniyam vá. so ce bhikkhünam sentike dütam 
pahineyya, samgho me kammam kattukAmo, ágaoohantu 
bhikkhü, icch4mi bhikkhünam ågetan ti, gantabbam bhi- 
kkhave settåhakaraniyene appahite pi, pag eva pahite, kin ti 


14 MAHAVAGGA. (III. 6. 10-16. 


nu kho samgho kammam па Кагеууа lahukåya và peripA- 
meyyå ’ti. sattàham sannivatto kAtabbo. [|10 katam và 
pan’ assa hoti samghene kemmam tajjaniyam và... 
ukkhepaniyam vå. so oe bhikkhünam santike dütam pahi- 
neyya, samgho me kammam akåsi, àgacohantu bhikkhd, 
icchåmi bhikkhQnam ågatan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattå- 
hakarapiyena appahite pi, pag eva pahite, kin ti nu kho sa- 
mmávatteyya lomam páteyya netthiram vatteyys, samgho 
tam kammam patippassambheyyå 'ti. sattåham sannivatto 
kåtabbo. lli; idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhunt gilå- 
nå hoti. så ce bhikkhünam santike dütam раћілеуув, 
abam hi gil&n&, &gacchantu syyå, iochåmi ayyünam Aga- 
tan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattåhakaraniyenn appahite 
pi, peg eva pahite, gilånabhattam vå pariyesissåmi, gilå- 
nupatthákabhattam vå periyesissámi, gilånabhessjjem vå 
pariyesissåmi, puccbissåmi và, upatthahissåmi vå 'ti. satté- 
ham sannivatto kåtabbo. ||12]| idha pana bhikkhave bhi- 
kkhuniyà anebhirati uppannå hoti. så ce bhikkhünam 
eantike dütam pehineyye, anabhirati me uppenná åga- 
cchantu ayyå, іссҺАші syyånam ågatan ti, gantabbam 
bhikkhave ssttåhakaraniyene appahite pi, pag eva pahite, 
anabbiratim våpakåsessåmi vå våpakåsåpessåmi và dhamma- 
katham våsså karissåmtti. sattåbam sannivatto kåtabbo. [|18 || 
idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhuniyå kukkucoam uppannam 
hoti så ce bhikkhünam santike dütam pahiņeyya, kakku- 
ccam me uppannam, Agacchantu ayyå, icohåmi ayyánam 
&gatan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattábakaraniyena appabite 
pi, pag eva pahite, kukkuccam vinodessåmi và vinodåpessåmi 
vå dhammakatham våsså karissámiti. sattåbam sannivatto 
kåtabbo. | 14] idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhuniyà ditthi- 
gatam uppannam hoti. så ce bhikkhünam santike dütam 
pahineyys, ditthigatam me uppsnnam, Agacchantu вууй, 
iochAmi ayyánam Agatan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattåhaka- 
raniyena appahite pi, pag eva pahite, ditthigatam viveceesá- 
mi vå vivecåpessåmi vå dhammakatham våsså karissimiti. 
sattàhum sannivatto kåtabbo. [|15] idha pana bhikkhave 
bhikkboni garudhammam ajjh4panné hoti månesttå- 
rahå. så oe bhikkhünam santike dütam pahineyya, aham hi 


їп. 6. 16-22.) MAHÅVAGGA. 145 


garudhammam в]}һёраппА månettårabå, ágacchantu ayyà, 
icchåmi eyyånam Agatan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattåha- 
karantyeps eppabite pi, pag eva pahite, månattadånam ussu- 
kkam keriss&miti. sattdham sannivatto kátabbo. (|161 idha 
pana bhikkhave bhikkhunt müláya patikassanürahá 
hoti. så ce bhikkhünem santike dütam pahipeyye, abam hi 
målåya patikassanürahá, ágacchantu ayyà, iochámi ayyánam 
&gatan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave satt&hekaraniyena appahite 
pi, pag eva pahite, mülàya petikassanam ussukkem karissá- 
miti. sattåham sannivatto kåtabbo. ||17|| idha pena bhi- 
kkhave bhikkhunt &bbhánárahá hoti. så ce bhikkhünam 
santike dütam pshineyya, sham hi abbbånårabå, ågacchantu 
ayyå, icchámi syyånam ågatan ti, gentabbam bhikkhave 
sattÀhakeraniyena appahite pi, pag eva pahite, abbhånam 
ussukkam kerissåmtti. sattåham sannivatto kåtabbo. ||18 || 
idba pana bbikkbave bhikkhuniyà samgho kammam 
kattuk&mo hoti tajjaniyam vá nissayam vå pabbå- 
jeniyam vå patisiraniyam vå ukkhepaniyam vå. så 
сө bhikkhünam santike dütam pahineyya, samgho me 
kammam kattukåmo, Agacchantu eyyå, icchåmi ayyånam 
ågatan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave satt&áhakaraniyena appahite 
pi pag eve pahite, kin ti nu kho samgho kammam na ka- 
reyya lshukàya vå paripàmeyyà 'ti. sattáham sannivatto 
kåtabbo. 11191 katam và pan’ asså hoti samghena kam- 
mam ќајјвпіует va... ukkhepaniyam vå. så ce bhi- 
kkhünam santike dütam pahineyya, samgho me kammam 
akåsi, ågacchantu syyå, icchåmi ayyánam Agatan ti, ganta- 
bbam bhikkhave sattåbakeraniyena appahite рі, pag eva pa- 
hite, kin ti nu kho sammávatteyya lomam påteyya nettháram 
vatteyya, samgho tam kemmam patippassambheyyå ”ti. sa- 
ttåham sannivatto kåtabbo. |1201 idhe pana bhikkhave 
sikkhamönå giláná hoti. så oe bhikkhünam santike 
dåtam pabineyya, sham bi gilånå, dgacchantu ayyå, icchåmi 
ayyånam ågatan ti, gantabbam bhikkbave sattåhakaraniyena 
appahite pi, pag eva pahite, gilånabbattam và pariyesissåmi, 
gilánupatthákabhattam và pariyesissámi, gilanabhesajjam vA 
pariyesissámi, puochissámi vá, upatthahiesdmi vå 'ti. sattå- 
ham sannivetto kátabbo. 1211 idha pana bhikkhave sikkhs- 


VOL. ш. 10 


146 MAHÁVAGGA. (III. 8. 22-27. 


mânâya anebhireti uppanvå hoti — la — sikkhamáün&ya 
kukkuccam uppannam hoti, sikkhamånåya ditthigatam 
uppannam hoti, sibkhamán&áya sikkhá kupità hoti. så 
ce bbikkhünam santike ditam pshineyys, sikkhå me kupitå, 
Agacchantu ayyå, icchimi ayyånam ågatan ti, gantabbam 
bhikkhave sattåhakeraniyene appabite pi, pag eva pahite, 
sikkh&samádánam ussukknm kerissdmiti. sattáham sanni- 
vatto kåtabbo. 1221 idha pana bhikkhave sikkhamáná upa- 
sampajjitukamé hoti. så ce bhikkhünam santike dütam 
pahipeyya, aham hi upasampajjitukåmå, ågacchantu аууё, 
iechami ayyünam ågatan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattåha- 
karaniyena appabite pi, pag eva pahite, upasampadam ussu- 
kkam karissimi vA, anussåvessåmi và, gapapürako vå bha- 
visedmiti. sattåham sannivatto kåtabbo. |23|| idha pana 
bhikkhave sámanero gilåno hoti. во ce bhikkhünam 
eantike dütam pahineyya, aham hi gilåno, ågacchantu bhi- 
kkhå, icchAmi bhikkhünam &gatan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave 
sattahakarantyens appahite pi, pag eva pahite, gilanabhattam 
và pariyesissåmi, gilånupattbåksbhattam và pariyesissimi, 
gilånabhesajjam vA pariyesissåmi, pucchissimi vá, upattha- 
hissámi vá 'ti. sattéham eannivatto kåtabbo. |1241 idha 
pane bhikkhave såmanerasss snabbirati uppennd hoti 
— la — sámanerasss kukkuooam uppannam hoti, simane- 
rasa dittbigatam uppannam hoti, såmanero vassam 
puochitukámo hoti, so ce bhikkhünam santike dütam 
pahineyya, sham hi vassam pucchitukámo, Agacchantu bhi- 
kkhd, icchámi bhikkhünam ågatan ti, gantabbam bbikkhave 
sattåhakaraniyena appahite pi, pag eva pahite, puochissåmi 
vå &ücikkhissámi vá 'ti. sattåham sannivatto kAtabbo. ||25 р 
idha pana bhikkbave såmanero upasampajjitukümo hoti. 
во ce bhikkhünam santike dütam pahineyya, aham hi upe- 
'sampejjitukámo, ågacchentu bhikkhü, iechámi bhikkhünam 
ágatan ti, gantabbam bhikkbave sattáhakaraniyena appahite 
pi peg eva pahite, upasampadam ussukkam karissàmi vá, 
anussåvessåmi và, ganapårako và bhevissåmiti. sattdham 
sannivatto kåtabbo. |26]; idha pana bhikkhave simayert 
gilånå hoti. så ce bhikkhünam eantike dåtam pabineyys, 
aham hi giláná, ågacchantu ayyá, iochámi ayyanam ågatan 


IIL. 6. 27-7. 4.) MAHÁVAGOA. 147 


ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattåhakaraniyens appahite pi, pag 
eva pahite, gilånabhattam vå pariyesiseåmi, gildnupatthdka- 
bhattam vå pariyesissåmi, gilánabhesajjam vå pariyesissdmi, 
pucchissimi va, upetthabissåmi và 'ti. satt&ham sannivatto 
kåtabbo. [|27] idha pana bhikkhave såmaneriyå anabhi- 
rati uppanná hoti — la — såmaneriyå kukkuccam uppa- 
nnam hoti, såmaneriyå ditthigatam uppannam hoti, så- 
тепегі vaesam pucohitukåmå hoti. så се bhikkhünam 
santike dütam pabineyya, abam hi vasam puochitukåmå, 
ågacchantu ayyå, icchåmi ayyünam ågatan ti, gantabbam 
bhikkhave ssttáhakaraniyena appahite pi, pag eva pahite, 
puochissåmi vå &cikkhiesámi vå "і. sattdham saunivetto kå- 
tabbo. 128 idha pana bhikkhave sámaperi eikkham se- 
mådiyitakåmå hoti. så ce bhikkhünam santike dütam 
pehipeyys, aham hi sikkham samådiyitukåmå, &gaochantu 
вууё, iochåmi ayyénam ågatan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave 
mttåhakeraniyena appabite pi, pag eva pahite, eikkbásamá- 
dåuam ussukkam kariseåmiti. sattåham sannivatto kåtabbo 
"di. 1291681 


tens kho pana samayene afifiatarassa bhikkhuno m&t& 
gilánà hoti. så puttassa eantike dütam påbesi, abam hi 
gilàn&, Agacchatu me putto, icchámi puttassa Agatan ti. 
atha kho tassa bhikkhuno etad ahosi: bhagavatà pafifiattam 
mttannam ssttåhakaraniyena pahite gantum, na tv eva appa- 
hite, paficannam sattåhakaraniyena appahite pi gantum, pag 
eva pahite, ayafi са me måtå gilånå så ca anupásiká. kstham 
nu kho mayá patipajjitabban ti bhagavato etam attham 
Årocesum. |11 anujånåmi bhikkhave eattannam satt&ha- 
karaniyens appahite pi gantum, peg eva pahite, bhi- 
kkhussa bhikkhuniyá sikkhemånåye s&manerasea såmeneriyå 
måtuyå ca pitussa ca. enujånåmi bhikkbave imesam satta- 
nam sattåhakaraniyena appahite pi gantum, pag eva pahite. 
sattáham eannivatto kåtabbo. |121 idha pane bhikkhave 
bbikkhussa måtå gilånå hoti. eA ce puttassa eantike dû- 
tam pahineyye, aham hi gilånå, ågacchatu me putto, icchåmi 
puttassa ågatan ti, gantabbam . . . (—III. 8. 2) . . . satiå- 
ham sannivatto kåtabbo. |3! idha pane bbikkbave bbi- 


148 MAHÅVAGGA. [III 7. 4-9. 1. 


kkhusss pitå gilåno hoti. so ce puttassa santike dütam 
pahineyya, aham hi gildno, Agacchatu me putto, iochåmi 
puttassa Agatan ti, gantabbam . . . (=III. 8. 2). . . sattå- 
kam sannivetto kåtabbo. |141 idha pane bhikkhave bhi- 
kkhuesa bhAt& gilåno hoti. so ce bhåtuno santike dütam 
pahineyya, aham hi gilåno, ágacchatu me bbåtå, icchAmi 
bhåtuno ågatan ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattdbakarantyena 
pahite, na tv eva appahite. sattáham sannivatto kåtabbo. 
151 idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhussa bhagint gilånå 
hoti. så ce bhátuno santike dütam pahineyya, aham hi 
gilånå, ágacchatu . . . (=$ 5). . . sattåham sannivatto kå- 
tabbo. 161 idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhuesea ñátako gilå- 
no hoti. во ce bbikkhussa santike dütam pahineyya, aham 
hi gilåno, &gacchatu bhaddanto, icohåmi bhaddantassa Sgatan 
ti, gantabbam bhikkhave sattåhakaraniyene pahite, na tv 
eva appahite. sattáham eannivatto kAtabbo. |7|| idha pana 
bhikkhave bhikkhugatiko gilåno hoti. во ce bhikkhü- 
nam santike dütam pahipeyya, aham hi gilåno, ågacchantu 
bhikkhà, iccbåmi bhikkhünam ágatan ti, gantabbam bhi- 
kkhave satt&áhakeraniyena pahite, na tv eva appehite. satt&- 
ham sannivatto kAtabbo ’ti. 181171] 


tena kho pana samayena samghasea vihåro udriyati. afiüa- 
tarena upåsakena araññe bbandam ohedåpitam hoti. so bhi- 
kkhünam santike dütam påhesi, sace bhaddanté tam bhandam 
avahareyyum, dajj&áham tam bhandan ti  bhagavato etam 
attham árocesum. anujövåmi bhikkhave samghekarani- 
yena gantum: eattåham eannivatto kAtabbo "ti. |1181 
vassåvåssbhånevårsm nitthitam. 


tena kho pane samayena Koselesu janapadesu afiflata- 
rasmim åvåse vassupagaté bhikkhü vá]ehi ubbá]há honti, 
ganhimsu pi paripåtimsu pi. bhagavato etam attham åro- 
cesum. idha pana bbikkhave vassupagatá bhikkhd vålehi 
ubbå[hå honti, ganbanti pi paripütenti pi. ев’ eva antaråyo 
”ti pakkamitsbbam.  anáüpatti vassacchedassa. idha pana 
bhikkhave vassupagsté bhikkhd sirimeapehi ubbà]hA 
honti, dasanti pi paripåtenti pi. ез’ eva . . . vaasacche- 


III. 9. 1-11. 2.) MAHÄVAGGA. 149 


dassa. |1] idha pana bhikkhave vassupagatà bhikkhü 
corehi ubbålha honti, vilampanti pi åkotenti pi. ев’ eva 
. ++ Vassacchedassa. idba pana bhikkhave vassupagatå bhi- 
kkhü piadoehi ubbajha honti, åvisanti pi ojam pi haranti, 
es’ eva . . . vassacchedassa. ||2|| idha pana bhikkhave vasam- 
pagatånam bhikkünam gåmo sgginå daddho hoti, bhi- 
kkhü pindakena kilamanti. ев’ eva... vassacchodassa. 
idha pana bhikkhave vassupegatånam bhikkhünam senâ- 
sanam agginá daddham hoti, bhikkhà sendsanena kila- 
manti. es’ eva . . . vassacchedassa. ||3|| idha pana bhi- 
kkhave vassupagatáànam bhikkhünam gåmo udakena 
vu]ho hoti, bhikkhü pindakena kilamanti, ев’ eva... 
vassacchedassa. idha pana bhikkhave vassupagatånam bhi- 
khünam senásenam udekens vu]ham hoti, bhikkhü 
senüsanena kilamanti. еа’ eva . . . vassacchedassá "ti. 
041191 


tena kho pane samayena afifiatarasmim Åvåse vassupaga- 
tånam bhikkhünam gámo corehi vutthási bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi bbikkhave yena gåmo 
tena gantun ti, gåmo dvedhå bhijjittha.  bhagavato 
etam attham drocesum. suvjånåmi bhikkhave yena bahu- 
tarå tena gantun ti. behutarå assaddhá honti appasannå. 
bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave ye- 
na saddhå pasanné tena gantun ti. || 1101 


tena kho pans samayens Kosalesu janspadesu afiflata- 
rasmim Åvåse vassupagatå bhikkhà ne labhimsu låkbassa vå 
pánitasaa vå bhojansasa yüvadattham páripürim. bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. idha pana bhikkhave vassupegatà 
bbikkhå na labhanti lükhasss và papitasss và bhojanassa 
yåvadattham páripürim. ев’ eva antaråyo ’ti pakkami- 
tabbam. andpatti vassacchedassa. idha pans bhikkhave 
vassupagatå bhikkhd labhsnti lükhassa và papitassa vå bho- 
janassa ydvadattham páripürim, па labhanti sappåyåni bho- 
јапёпі. es’ eva... vassacchedassa. |11 idha pana bhi- 
kkhave vassupagatå bhikkhü labhanti lûkhassa và panitassa 
và bhojanassa yåvedattham påripårim, lebbanti sappåyåni 


150 МАНАҮАПОА. [TIL и. 2-7. 


bhojanåni, na labhanti sappåyåni bhesajjåni. es’ eva... 
vassacchedasss. idha pana bhikkhave vassupagatå bhikkhü 
labhanti lükhassa và panitassa vå bhojanassa yávadattham på- 
ripürim, lebhenti sappayani bbojanåni, labhanti sappåyåni 
bbessjjåni, na labhanti patirüpam upattbåkam. ев’ eva 
« . . Vassabchedasss. ||2|| idha pana bhikkhave vassupaga- 
tam bhikkhum itthi nimanteti: ehi bhante hiraññam và te 
demi, suvannam vå te demi, khettam vå t. d., vatthum và 
t. d., gávum vå t. d, gåvim vå t. d., dásam vå t. d., dásim va 
t. d., dhitaram vå t. d. bhariyatthåye, aham và te bhariyå 
homi, afifiam vå te bhariyam ånemiti. tatra ce bhikkhuno 
evam hoti: lahuparivattam kho cittam vuttam bhagavetá, 
siyåpi me brahmacariyassa antaråyo 'ti, pakkamitabbam. 
anåpatti vassacohedassa. |1311 idha pana bhikkhave vessupa- 
gatam bhikkhum vesi nimanteti — la — thullakumári ni- 
manteti, pandako nimanteti, fidtakA nimantenti, rájàno ni- 
mantenti, corá nimantenti, dhuttå nimantenti: ehi bhante 
hirafifiam và te деша . . . dhitaram vA te deme bhariyattha- 
ув, айдат vå te bbariyam dneasimé ’ti. tatra ce bhikkhuno 
evam hoti: lahuparivattam . . . vassacchedassa. idha pana 
bhikkhave vassupagato bhikkhu asåmikam nidhim passa- 
ti. tatra ce bhikkhuno evam hoti: labuparivattam . . . vassa- 
øchedassa. ||4| idha pana bhikkhave vassupagato bhikkhu 
passati sambahule bhikkhü samghabhedaya parakka- 
mante. tatra ce bhikkhuno evam hoti: garuko kho samgha- 
bhedo vutto bhagavatå, må mayi sammukhibhüte samgho 
bhijjiti, pakkamitabbam. an&patti vassacchedassa. idha-pa- 
na bhikkhave vassupagato bhikkhu supáti: sambaholå kira 
bhikkhQ samghabhedáya parakkemantiti. tatra ce . . . 
vassacchedassa, ||öj| idha pana bhikkhave vassupagato bhi- 
kkhu sunåti: amukasmim kira åvåse sambahulå bhikkhü 
eamgbabhedáya parakkamantiti. tatra oe bbikkhuno evam 
hoti: te kho me bhikkhü mitt, ty &hem vakkhámi : garuko 
kho Avuso samghabhedo vutto bhagavatå, máyasmantánam 
samghabhedo ruccitthà ’ti, karissanti me vacapam suseüsi- 
esanti sotam odahissantiti, pakkamitabbam.  anápatti vassa- 
cchedasas. |61 idha рапа bhikkhave vassupagato bhikkhu 
supåti: amukasmim kira Avdse sambahulå bhikkhü samgha- 


III. 11. 7-19. 1.] MAHÅVAGGA. 151 


bhedåya parakkamantiti. tatra ce bhikkhuno evam hoti: te 
kho me bhikkh( ns mittå, api ca ye team mittå te me mittå, 
ty &ham vakkhåmi, te vuttå te vakkhanti: garuko ... 
(=$6) . . . vassacchedassa. |7|| idha pana bhikkhave va- 
esupegato bhikkhu sunåti: amukasmim kira Avise sambahu- 
lehi bhikkhühi samgho bhinno ’ti. tatra ce bhikkhuno evam 
hoti : te kho me bhikkhü mittå, ty ham vakkhámi: garuko 
«++ (=$ 6... vassaochedasss. [8] idha pana bhi- 
kkhave vassupagato bhikkhu eunåti: amukasmim kira üvàse 
sambahulehi bhikkhübi samgho bhinno ’ti. tatre ce bhi- 
kkhuno evam hoti: te kho me bhikkhå na mittå, api са ye 
tesam mittå te me mitté, ty ham vakkhåmi, te УОНА te va- 
kkhanti: garuko . . . (=§6).. . vassacchedassa. ||9 |І 
idha pana bhikkhave vassopagato bbikkhu supati: amukas- 
mim kira åvåse sambahulå bhikkhuniyo samghabhedáya pa- 
rakkamantiti. tatra ce bhikkhuno evam hoti: tå kho mo 
bhikkhaniyo mittå, tåbam vakkhåmi : garuko kho bhaginiyo 
samghabhedo vutto bhagavatå, må bhagininam samghabhedo 
ruccitthá "ti, karissanti me vacanam sussûsissanti sotam oda- 
hissantiti, pakkamitabbam. anåpatti vassaochedassa. ||10 || 
idba pana bhikkhave vassupagasto bhikkhu supáti: amu- 
kasmim kira åvåse eambahulé bhikkhuniyo samghabhedåya 
perakkemantiti. tatra ce bhikkhuno evam hoti: tå kho me 
bhikkhaniyo na mittå, api ca yà {Алаш mittå tå me mittA, 
tåham vakkhåmi, tà vuttå tà vakkhanti: garuko . . . 
(2810)... vassacchedaasa. ||l1|| idha pana bhikkhave 
vassupagato bhikkhu supáti: amukasmim kira ñváse samba- 
hulåbi bhikkhunihi samgho bbinno "ti. tatra ce bkikkhuno 
evam hoti: tå kho me bhikkhuniyo mittå, tåham vakkbåmi : 
garuko ...(=§10).. . vassacchedassa, ||12|| idha pana 
bhikkhave vassupagato bhikkhu sunåti: amukasmim kira 
åvåse sambehul&áhi bbikkhunihi samgho bhinno "і. tatra co 
bbikkhuno evam hoti : tå kho me bhikkbuniyo па mittå, api 
са уй tåsam mittå tå me mittå, tåharn vakkhåmi, tå vuttå tà 
vakkhanti : garako . . . (=§ 10) . . . vassscohedassa. 
11811 


tena kho pana samayene aññataro bhikkhu vaje vasam 


152 MAHAVAGGA. (1. 19, 1-8. 


upagantukåmo hoti.  bbagavato etam attbam årocesum. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave vaje vassam upagantun ti. vajo 
vutthüsi. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujånå- 
mi bhikkhave yens vajo tena gantum ti. ||| tena kho 
pans samayena aññataro bhikkhu upaksttbåya vassu- 
penüyik&ya satthenn gantukåmo hoti. bbagavato etam 
attham årocesum. anujinimi bhikkhave satthe vassam 
upagantun ti. tena kho pana samayene aññataro bhikkbu 
upakattháys vassupanåyikåya nåvåye gantukAmo hoti. bha- 
gavato etam attham årocesum. anujânâmi bhikkhave nå- 
våye vassam upagantun ti. ||2|| tena kho pana samayena 
bbikkbå rukkhasusire vassam upagacchanti. menusså ujjhá- 
yanti khiyanti vipåcenti, seyyath@pi pisdcillikA 'ti. bhaga- 
vato etam attham Arocesum. na bhikkhave rukkhasasire 
vassam upagantabbam. yo upagaccheyya, åpatti dukkatasså 
'ti.||3]| tena kho pana samayena bhikkhú rukkhavitabhiyá 
vassam upagacchanti. manuså ujjbåyanti kbiyanti vipá- 
centi, seyyathåpi migaluddak& ’ti. bhagavato etam attham 
årocesum. na bhikkhave rukkhavitabhiyå vassam upea- 
gantabbam. yo upagaccheyya, åpatti dukkatamå "ti. ||4]| 
tena kho pana samayena bhikkhü ajjhokáse vasam upa- 
gacchanti, deve vassante rukkhamülam pi nimbakosam pi 
upadbåvanti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. na bhi- 
kkhave ajjhokåse vassam upagantabbam. yo upagacche- 
уув, Spatti dukkatasså ”ti. ||5|| tene kho pana samayena 
bhikkhü asendsanaké vessam upagaocbanti, sitena pi kila- 
manti unhena pi kilamanti. bhagavato etam attham åro- 
cesum. na bhikkhave asenåsanakene vassam upaganta- 
bbam. yo upagaccheyya, &patti dukkatasså "ti, [6] tena 
kho pana samayena bbikkhü chavakutikåya vassam upa- 
gacchanti. manusså ujjháyanti khiyanti vipåcenti, seyya- 
ёрі chavadáhaká 'ti. bbagaveto etam attham ürocesum, 
na bhikkhave chavakutiküya vassam apagantabbam. yo 
upagaccheyya, åpatti dukkatasså "ti. |71 tena kho pana 
samayena bhikkhü chatte vassam upegacchanti. manusså 
ujjháyanti khiyanti vip&centi, seyyathåpi gopålakå 'ti. bha- 
gevato etam sttham årocesum. na bhikkhave chatte vas- 
sam upagantabbam. yo upagaccheyya, åpatti dukkataseå "ti. 


III. 19. 8-14. 2.] MABAVAGGA. 153 


181 tena kho рапа samayena bhikkhd cåtiyå vassam upa- 
gacchanti. manusså ujjbåyanti khiyanti vipåcenti, seyyathá- 
pi titthiyå "і. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. na bhi- 
kkhave cåtiyå vassam upagantabbam. yo upagaccheyya, 
&petti dukkataseá "ti. |91121 


tena kho pena samayena Såvatthiyå eamghena ka- 
tikà kstå hoti antarå vassam na pabbåjetabban ti. Viså- 
khåys Migåramåtuyå nattá bhikkhü upasamksmitvå 
pabbajjam yåci. bhikkhü evam åhamsu: samghena kho 
Avuso КАСКА katå antarå vasam na pabbijetabban ti, ágame- 
hi åvuso yåva bhikkhQ vassam vasanti, vassam vutthå pabba- 
jessantiti. atha kho te bbikkhå vassam vuttbå Visåkbåya 
Migåramåtuyå nattåram etad avocum : ehi dåni 4vuso pabba- 
jåhiti. so evam Aha: sac’ åbam bhante pabbajito assam, 
abbirameyyåm” åham, na dán” Abam bhante pabbsjissåmiti. [|1 
Visàkhá Migáramátà ujjbåyati khiyati vipáceti: katbafl hi 
nÁma ayyå evarüpam katikem kerissanti na antará vassam 
pabbåjetabban ti, kam kAlam dhammo na caritabbo "ti. 
assosum kho bhikkhà Visåkhåya Migåramåtuyå ujjhåyantiyå 
khigantiyà vip&centiy& atha kho te bhikkhü bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. ne bhikkhave evaråpå katiké kà- 
tabbå antarå vassam na pabbåjetabban ti. yo kareyya, Apatti 
dukketasså "ti. 1211311 


tene kho pana samayens &yasmetá U panandena Sakya- 
puttena гаййо Pasenadissa Ковв1аввв vassávüso pati- 
suto hoti purimikåye. so tam åvåsam gacchanto addasa 
antará magge dve åvåse bahucivarake, tassa etad ahosi: yam 
nünüham imesu dvisu &vásesu vassam vaseyyam, evam me 
bahu civaram uppajjissatiti. во tesu dvisu &vüsesu vassam 
vasi. гаја Pasenadi Kosalo ujjbáyati khiyati vipåceti: ka- 
thañ hi nåma ayyo Upanando Sakyaputto ambåkam vassåvå- 
sam petisunitvå visamvádessati. nanu bhagavatA enekapari- 
yåyena musåvådo garahito, musåvådå veramani pasatthå "ti. 
III assosum kho bhikkhf rafifio Pasenadissa Kosalassa 
ujjbåyantesss khiyantasss vipåcentassa. ye te bhikkhü 
appicchå, ќе ujjbåyanti khiyanti vipåcenti: katham hi náma 


154 MAHÅVAGGA. (UL 14. 2-6. 


åyasmå Upanendo Sakyaputto гаййо Pasenadissa Kosalasss 
vassåvåsam patisunitvå visamvådessati. nanu bhagavaté ane- 
kapariyåyena musåvådo garahito, musåvådå veramant pasa- 
tthá 'ti. |2] atha kho te bhikkhà bhagavato etam attham 
Årocesum. atha kho bhagavå etasmim nidáne bhikkhusam- 
gbam sannipåtåpetvå áyasmantam Upanandam Sakyaputtam 
patipuochi: saccam kira tvam Upenanda rañño Pasenadiesa 
Koealassa vassåvåsam patisunitvå visamvádesiti. — saccam 
bhagavå. vigarahi buddho bhagavà: katham hi n&ma tvam 
moghapurisa rafifio Pasenadissa Kosalassa vassåvåsam pati- 
sunilvå visamvådessasi. nanu mayá moghapurisa anekapari- 
yüyens musåvådo garahito musåvådå veramap! pesatthA. п’ 
etam moghapurisa appasannánam vå pasådåya — la — viga- 
rahitvå dhammikatham ketvå bhikkhü &mantesi: |3|] idha 
pana bhikkhave bhikkhun& vassåvåso patiseuto hoti 
purimikåyå. во tam åvåsam guochanto passati entará 
magge dve åvåse bahucivarake, tassa evam hoti: yam nün&- 
hem imesu dvisu Åvåsesu vassam vaseyyam, evam me bahum 
civaram uppaijiesatiti. во (еви dvisu Avdsesu vassam vasati. 
tassa bhikkhave bbikkbuno purimikå ca na paññáyati peti- 
ssave ca Apatti dukkatassa. ||4]| idha pana bhikkhave bhi- 
kkbunå vassåvåso patissuto hoti purimikåya. во tam âvåsam 
gacchanto bahiddhå uposatham karoti, påtipadena vihåram 
upeti senåsanam pefilápeti påniyam peribhojaniyam upetthå- 
peti parivenam eammajjati, so tadah’ eva akaraniyo pakkamati. 
tassa bhikkhave bhikkhuno purimikå ca na раййдуаб patiasa- 
ve са åpatti dukkatassa. idha pana. ..(=6 5)... во tadah’ eva 
sakaraniyo pakkamati. tassa bhikkhave bhikkhuno purimi- 
kå ca na pafifidyati patissave са patti dukketassa. |5 idha 
pane ... so dvihatibam vasitvå akaraniyo pakkamati. tassa 
bhikkhave bhikkhuno purimiká св na pafifiayati patissave ca 
&patti dukkatassa. idha pena... во dvihattharp vasitvå sakars- 
niyo pakkamati. tassa bhikkhave bhikkhuno purimikå ca na 
pailiidyati patiesave ca ápatti dukkatassa. idha pana . . .sodvi- 
hatiham vasitvà eattabakaraniyena pakkamati. во tam sattå- 
ham bahiddha vitinåmeti. tassa bhikkhave bhikkhuno puri- 
mikå са na paññáyati patissave ca åpetti dukkatassa. idha 
pana ... eo dvihatiham vasitvå sattåbakeraniyens pakka- 


LIL 14 6-11.) MAHÄVAGGA. 155 


mati. so tam sattåham anto sannivattam karoti. tassa 
bhikkhave bhikkhuno purimikå ca paiü&yati patissave ca 
anåpatti. 16| idha pana . . . во eattáham anégatåye pavå- 
ranáys вакагапіуо pakkemati.  &gaccheyya và so bhikkhave 
bhikkhu tam åvåsam na vå ågaccheyya, tassa bhikkhave bhi- 
kkhuno purimiká ca paññáyati patisssve os anApatti. ||7 || 
idha pana bhikkhave bbikkhunå vassåvåso petissuto hoti 
purimiküya. во tam åvåsam gantvå uposatham karoti, páti- 
padena vihåram upeti sendsanam paññápeti påniyam pari- 
bbojaniyarn upettbápeti parivepam sammajjati. so tadah’ 
eva акагапіуо pakkamati, tases bhikkhave bhikkhuno puri- 
mikå ca na paññâyati petissave ca &patti dukkatasaa. ||8|| 
idha рапа ... (== $ 8) .. . so tadah’ eva sakarantyo pa- 
kkamati — la — so dvihatiham vasitvå akarantyo pakkamati 
— 18 — eo dvihatiham vasitvå sakaraniyo pakkamati — la — 
so dvihatibam vasitvå aattåhakaraniyena pakkamati. so tam 
sattáham bahiddh& vitinámeti. tassa bhikkhave bhikkhuno 
purimiká ca na pafifiåyati patissave ca &patti dukkatassa. ||9 || 
во dvihatiham vasitvå sattáhakarantyena pakkamati. so tam 
eattåham anto sannivattam karoti. tassa bhikkhave bhi- 
kkhuno purimikå ca paññáyati patissave ca andpatti. во 
sattáham anágatáya . . . (= 8 7). . . anåpatti. |10] idba 
pane bhikkhave bhikkhuna vassåvåso patissuto hoti pacchi- 
mikåya. во tam âvåsam gacchanto bahiddhá uposatham 
karoti, påtipadena vihåram upeti senåsanam pafifiåpeti påni- 
yam paribhojaniyam upattbåpeti parivenam eammajjati. so 
tadah’ eva akarantyo pakkamati. tassa bhikkhave bhikkhuno 
pacchimikå ca na paüiüáyati patissave ca åpatti dukkatasaa. 
idha pana . . . (the whole passage ts identical with $ 5-10; 
read instead of purimikA and purimik&ya: pacchimiké and 
pecchimik&ya, instead of anågatåye pavåranåye : anága- 
tåya komudiy& cåtumåsiniyå) . . . patissave ca anåpatti- 
ti. 1111141 
vassupsnåyikakkhendheko tatiyo. 


tassa uddünam : 
upagantum, kadå с’ eva, kati, antarå vassa ca, 
na icchanti ca, saficicoa, ukkaddhitum, upåsako,| 


156 


= 


MAHÅVAGGA. 


giláno, måtå ca, pitå, bhåtå ca, atha fiåtako, 
bhikkhugatiko, vihåro, vålå cápi, eirimsapá,| 
corå с” eva, pisåcå ca, daddho, tadubhayena ca, 
vu]ho dakena, vutthåsi, bahutarå ca, dåyakg,| 
lükhapenitasapp&ya-bhesajj'-upatthakena ca, 
itthi, vest, kumåri са, pandako, fiåtakena ca,| 
råjå, corå, dhuttå, nidhi, bhedå, atthavidhena ов, 
vajå, забб ca, nåvå ca, susire, vitabhåya ca,| 
ajjhok&se vassåvåso, asen&sanakena ca, 
chavakutikå, chatte ca, cåtiyå ca upenti te,| 
katiká, patisunitvå, bahiddhå ca uposathá, 
purimiká, pacchimiké, yathånayena yojaye,| 
akaraniyo pakkamati, sakaraniyo tath' eva ca, 
dvihatihå ca puna, sattåhakaraniyena ca,| 
sattåhanågatå с’ eva, ågaccheyya na eyya vå, 
vatthuddáne antarikå tantimaggam nisåmaye ’ti.| 
imamhi khandhake vatthu dvepannåsa. 


157 


MAHAVAGGA. 


IV. 


Tena samayena buddho bhagavå Sávatthiyam viharati 
Jetavane Andthapindikassa frame. tens kho pana ea- 
mayene sambahula sanditthá sambhattà bhikkhü Kosalesu 
јепарадево aññatarasmim åvåse vassam upagacchimsu. atha 
kho tesam bhikkhünam etad shosi: kena nu kho mayam 
updyena samaggá sammodamånå avivadamånå phåsukam 
vasam vaseyyåma na ca pindakens kilemeyyàmà "ti. [1] 
atha kho tesam bhikkhünam etad ahosi: sace kho mayam 
аййашаййаш n’ eva Alapeyydma na sallapeyyåme, уо patha- 
mam gåmato pindåya patikkameyya, во Asanam paflilåpeyya, 
pádodakam pådapitbam pådeketbalikem upanikkhipeyya, 
avakkårapåtim dhovitvå upattbåpeyya, påniyam paribhoja- 
niyam upetthåpeyya, 121 yo pacchå gåmato pindAya pati- 
kkameyya, вас’ assa bhuttåvaseso, sace dkankheyya, bhufije- 
уув, no ce dkankheyya, appabarite vA chaddeyya appånake 
vå udake opildpeyya, во &sanam uddbareyye, pådodakam på- 
dapitham pádakathalikam petisåmeyya, avakkårapåtim dho- 
vitvå petisåmeyya, pániyam paribhojaniyam patis&meyya, 
bhattaggam sammajjeyya, ||3l| yo passeyya pániyaghatam 
và paribhojeniyaghatam và vaccaghatam vá rittam tuccham, 
во upatthüpeyys, sac’ assa avisayham hetthavikdrena, duti- 
yam Amantetva hatthavilanghakena upattbåpeyya, na tv eva 
teppaccayá våcam bhindeyya, evam kho mayam samaggå 
sammodamånå avivadamán& phåsukam vassam vaseyyåma na 
ca pindakena kilameyyåmå 'ti. |4|| atha kho te bhikkhü 
aüüamaüüam n’ eve ålapimsu па ssllapimsu. yo pathamam 
gåmato pindáya patikkamati, so Asanam pafifidpeti, pådoda- 
kam pádapitham pådakethelikem upanikkbipati, evekkåre- 
påtim dhovitvå upatthåpeti, påniyam paribhojaniyam upa- 


158 MAHÅVAGGA. LIV. 1. 5-11. 


ttbåpeti. ||5|| yo pacebå gåmato pindåya patikkamati, васе 
hoti bhuttávaseso, sace ákankhati, bhufljati, no ce 4kankhati, 
appaharite vå chaddeti appånake và udake opilápeti, so &sa- 
nam uddharsti pádodakam pádapitham pádakathalikam pati- 
såmeti, avakkårapåtim dhovitvå patisámeti, pániyam pari- 
bhojaniyam patisåmeti, bhattaggem sammajjati. ||6) уо 
passati paniyaghatam và paribhojaniyaghatam vA vaccagha- 
tam v4 rittam tuccham, so upatthüpeti. sac’ assa hoti avi- 
sayham hatthavikdrena, dutiyam åmantetvå hatthavilanghs- 
kena upatthåpeti, na tv eva tappaccayå vácam bhindati. |17 || 
Acinnam kho pan’ etam vassam vutthánam bhikkhüuam bha- 
gavantam dassanüya upasamkamitum. atha kho te bhikkhQ 
vassam vutthd temåsaccayena senåsanam samsåmetvå pattaci- 
varam ådåya yena S&vatthi tena pakkamimsu, anupubbena 
yena Sávatthi Jetavanam Apåthapindikassa árámo, yena 
bhegavå ten’ upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam 
abbivådetvå ekemontam nisidimsu. åcinnam kho pan’ 
etam buddhinam bhegevantånam ågantukebi bbhikkhübi 
eaddhim petisemmoditum. ||8|| atha kho bhagavå te bhi- 
kkhü etad avoca: kacci bhikkbave khamaniyam, kaoci yå- 
paniyam, kacci samaggå sammodamAné avivadamånå phåsu- 
kam vessam vasittha ne са pindakena kilamitthå t kba- 
maniyam bbagavå, yápaniyam bhagavå, samaggå ca mayam 
bhante sammodamånå avivadamånå pbåsukam vassam va- 
simbå па ca pindakena kilamimbå "ti. 191 jånantåpi tathå- 
gatå pucchanti, jánantápi па puochanti, kålam viditvå pu- 
ochanti, kalam viditvå nå pucchanti, atthasambitam (аара! 
pucchanti no anatthasamhitam, enatthasamhite setughåto 
tathügatónam. dvihi ükárehi buddhá bhagavanto bhikkhà 
patipucchanti, dhammam v4 desessáma, eåvåkånam va ai- 
kkhåpadam pafifiapessAmé ’ti. atha kho bbagavå te bbikkhå 
etad avoca: yathakatham pana tumhe bhikkhave samaggå 
sammodamånå avivadamånå phåsukam vassam vasittha na ca 
pindakena kilamitthå ’ti. [101 idha mayam bhante samba- 
hulå sanditthå sambbattå bhikkbf Kosalesu janapadesu аййа- 
tarasmim åvåse vassam upagacchimhá. tesam no bhante 
ambåkam etad ahoei: kena nu kho mayam upåyena samaggå 
sammodamånå avivedamånå phåsnkam vassam vaseyyåma no 


IV. 1. 11-14.) MAHÁYAGOA. 159 


ca pirdakens kilameyyåmå "і. teaam no bhante amhükam 
etad ahosi: sace kho mayam . . . evam kho mayam sam- 
aggå sammodamånå avivadamånå phåsokam vassam ve- 
seyyåma na са pindakens kilameyyåmå ’ti. athe kho mayam 
bhante aññamaññam n’ eva &lapimhá na sallapimhå. уо 
pathamam gåmato рїпдАуа patikkamati, so åsanam pafiflå- 
peti, pådodakam . . . våcam bhindati. evam kho msyam 
bhante samaggå sammodamånå avivadamånå phüsukam vas- 
sam vasimbå па ca pindakena kilamimbá 'ti. [1111 setba kho 
bhagavá bhikkhü &mantesi: epbåsufl fieva kira "me bhi- 
kkhave moghapuriså vutthà samánà phåsu 'mbha vutthå 'ti 
petijånanti, разовашуёвай fieva kira 'me bhikkhave mogha- 
purisá vutthå samånå phásu "ће vutthà 'ti patijånanti, ela- 
kasamvåsafi eva kira 'me bhikkhave moghapuried vuttbå 
samånå phåsu 'mhe vutthá ’ti patijånanti, pamattasamvüsai 
fieva kira ’me bhikkhave moghapuriså vutthå samånå phisu 
'mhe vuttbå ”ti patijånanti. katham hi nåm' ime bhikkhave 
moghapuriså migabbatam titthiyssamådånam samådiyissan- 
ti. [12] m etam bhikkhave appasannånam vA pasidAya. 
vigarshitvà dhammikatham ketvå bhikkhü Amantesi: na 
bhikkhave mügabbatam titthiyessmådånem samådiyitabbam. 
yo samådiyeyya, Apatti dukkatassa. anujånåmi bhikkhave 
vassam vuttbánam bhikkhünam + і thanehi pavåretum 
ditthena vá sutena và parisafikåya vå. så vo bhavissati afifiam- 
afifianulomat& ápattivutthánatà vinayapurekkhåretå. 118 || 
evañ ca рапа bbikkhave paváretabbam. vyattena bhi- 
kkhunå patibalene samgho fiåpetabbo: sunåtu me bbante 
samgho. ajja pavåranå. yadi eamghassa pattakallam eam- 
gbo pavåreyyå 'ti. therena bhikkhuná ekamsam uttar&- 
sangam karitvå ukkutikem nisiditvå afijalim paggahetva 
evam assa vacaniyo: samgham åvuso pavåremi dittbeua vê 
sutena và perisankáya vå, vadantu mam Åyesmanto anu- 
kampam 'upådåye, passanto patikarissámi. dutiyam pi . 

tatiyam pi åvuso samgham paváremi ditthena và sutena vå 
parisankAya va, vadantu mam Ayesmanto anukampam upå- 
dåya, passanto patikerissåmiti. navakena bbikkbunå ekam- 
sam uttardsafigam karitvå ukkutikam pistditvå afljelim pa- 
ggehotvà evam assa vacaniyo: samghem bhente pevåremi 


160 MAHAVAGGA. У. 1. 14-3. 3. 


ditthene vå . . . dutiyam pi . . . tatiyam pi . . . passanto 
potikarissAmiti. |14111 


tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyå bhikkhü there- 
su bhikkhüsu ukkutikam pisinnesu pavérayaménesu åsanesu 
acchanti. ye te bhikkhü appicché te ujjbåyenti khiyanti 
vipåcenti: katham bi nåma chabbaggiyé bhikkhü theresa 
bhikkhüsu ukkutikam nisinnesu pavårayamånesu faanesu 
acchiasantiti. atha kho te bhikkhü bbagavato etam attham 
Årocesum. вассаш kira bhikkhave chabbaggiyå bbikkhå 
theresu . . . acchentiti. saccem bbagevå.  vigarahi bu- 
ddbo bhagavá: katham bi паша te bhikkhave moghapuriså 
theresu . . . acchissanti. n' etam bhikkhave appasannånam 
vå pasådåya. vigarahitvå dhammikatham Кабуд bhikkhü 
&mentesi: na bhikkhave theresu bhikkbQeu ukkutikam ni- 
sinnesu pavårayamånesu Åsanesu ecchitabbam. yo accheyya, 
Apatti dukkatassa.  anuján&ámi bhikkhave sabbeh’ eva 
ukkutikam nisinnehi paváretun ti. |11 tena kho 
pena samayena аййаќаго thero jerådubbalo yåva sabbe pavå- 
rentiti ukkutikam nisinno ågamayamåno mucchito papati. 
bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. sanujånåmi bhikkhave 
tadantarå ukkutikam nisiditum yåva paváreti, pavåretvå 
Asane nistditun ti. |12121 


atha kho bhikkhdnam etad ahosi: kati nu kho paváraná 
‘ti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. dve "må bbikkhave 
pavåranå cátuddasiká pannarasiká ca. ima kho bhikkhave 
dve pavåranå 'ti. 11 atha kho bhikkhünam etad аһові : 
kati nu kho pevåranaekammåniti. bbegavato etam 
attham årocesum. cattår' imáni bhikkbave pevåranaksmmå- 
ni, adhammena vaggam pavåranskammam . . . (= II. 14. 
2,3. Read pavårapakammam instead of uposathakammem) 
. sikkhitabban ti. |2|| atha kho bhagavà bhikkhà 
Amantesi: sannipatatha bhikkhave, samgho paváressatiti. 
evam vutte sññataro bhikkhu bhagavantam etad avoca : 
&tthi bhante bhikkhu gilåno, so anågato 'ti. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave gilånene bhikkhun& pavåranam dåtum. evañ 
ca pana bhikkhave dåtabbå. tena gilánena bbikkhunå ekam 


IV. 3. 3-4. 3.] MAHÅVAGGA. 161 


bhikkhum vupssamkemitvé ekamsam utterüsangam ksritvå 
ukkutikam nisiditvå afijelim paggahetvà evam aasa vacant- 
yo: pavåranam dammi, pavaranam me hara, mam’ attháya 
pavårehiti. kAyena vififi@peti, våcåya viññápeti, kåyena vå- 
cåya viflfidpeti, dinnå hoti pavåranå. na kåyens viññápeti, 
na våcåya viññápeti, na kåyena våcåys vififlåpeti, na dinnå 
hoti pavárepá. |31 evam ce tam labhetha, ico etam kusa- 
lam. по ce labhetha, so bhikkhave giláno bhikkhu maficene 
vå pithena và eamghamajjhe åÅnetvå pavåretabbam. sace 
bhikkhave gilánupstthákánam bhikkhünsm evam hoti: sace 
kho mayam gilånam thånå cávessáma, åbådbo vA abhiva- 
ddhissati kAlamkiriyå vå bhavissatiti, na bhikkhave gilåno 
thånå cávetabbo, samghena tatthe gantvå pavåretabbam, na 
tv eva vaggene samghena pavåretsbbam. pavåreyya ce, 
Apetti dukkatassa. |41 pavårenåbårako ce bhikkhave di- 
ппфув pavåranåys . . . (= II. 29. 3, 4. Read pavårenå, 
pavåranåya, pavåranåbårako instead of pürisuddhi, påri- 
suddhiyå, pårisuddhihårako) . . . pav&ran&áhárakasss åpatti 
dukkatassa. enujånåmi bhikkhave tadabu pavåranåye pavå- 
Tanam dentena chandam pi dåtum santi eamghaasa karaniyan 
ti. 06181 


tena kho pana samayena afifiataram bhikkhum tadahu pa- 
várapüya fiàtakA ganhimsu.  bhagavato etam attham aro- 
сешп. idha рапа bhikkhave bbikkhum tadahu paváranáya 
fiàtakà gaphanti. te ñátaká bbikkhühi evam assu vacaniyá : 
inghe tumhe åyasmanto imam bhikkhum muhuttam muñca- 
tha yåvåyam bhikkhu pavåretiti. | 1 | evam ce tam labhetha, 
icc etam kusalam, no ce labbetha, te fiåtakå bhikkhühi evam 
assu vacaniyå : ingha tumhe &yasmanto muhuttam ekam- 
antam hotha yåvåyam bbikkhu paváranam дейі. evam 
ce tam labhetha, icc etam kusalam, no ce labhetha, te fiåta- 
kA bhikkhühi evam assu vacaniyá: ingha tumhe åyasmanto 
imam bhikkhum mubuttam nissimam netha yáva samgho 
pavaretiti. evam ce tam labhetha, ico etam kusalam, no ce 
labheths, na tv eva vaggene samghena pavåretabbam. pa- 
våreyya се, Apatti dukkatassa. 121 idha рапа bhikkhave 
bhikkhum tadahu pavürspüys råjåno ganhanti, oorå gap- 


чот. ш. 11 


162 MAHÁYAGGA. Uv. 4 3-4. 4. 


hanti, dhuttå ganhanti, bbikkhü paccatthikA ganhanti. te 
bbikkhå paccatthika bhikkhühi evam assu vacaniyå: ingha 
. » . (comp. $1. 2) . . . na tv eva vaggena samghens pavå- 
retabbam. pavireyye ce, åpatti dukkatasså 'ti. 131411 


tena kho pana samayena afifiatarasmim Åvåse tadahu pavå- 
ranåya paños bhikkhü vibaranti. atha kho team bhi- 
kkhünam etad ahosi : bhagavatA pafiflattam samghena pavå- 
retabben ti, mayañ с’ amhå райса jan&. ketham nu kho 
ambehi pavåretabban ti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave paficannam samghe pavåretun ti. ||] If 
tena kho pana samayena afifiatarasmim Avdse tadahu pavå- 
ranåya oattåro bhikkhü viheranti. atha kho tesam bhi- 
kkhünam etad аһов:: bbagavatà anufifiåtam paficannam 
samghe pavàretum, швуай с’ amhá cattáro jan. katham 
nu kho amhehi pavdretabban ti. bhagavato etam attham 
Arocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave catunnam аййашаййат 
pavåretum. ||2|| evañ ca pana bhikkhave pavdretabbam : 
vyattena bbikkhunå patibslena te bhikkhå fidpetabba : su- 
nantu me åyasmanto. ajja pavåranå. yad’ &yasmantáoam - 
pattakallam mayam aññamaññam pavåreyyåmå 'ti. therena 
bbikkhunå ekamsam uttarüsangam karitv4 ukkutikam nist- 
ditvå afijalim paggahetvà te bhikkhü evam assu vacanfyå: 
aham ávueo åyasmante pavåremi ditthena vå sutena và pa- 
risabkaya vá, vadantu mam àyusmanto anukampam upådåya, 
passanto patikariesAmi. dutiyam рі . . . tatiyam pi åvuso 
++. patikerissimiti, nevakena bhikkhun& ekamsam uttar&- 
sangam karitvà ukkutikam nisiditvå afijalim paggahetvá te 
bhikkhü evam assu vacaniyë : aham bhante åyasmante pavå- 
remi ditthena vå . . . dutiyam рї... tatiyam pi . . . pa- 
fikarissámiti |311 tena kho pans ватауепа afifiatarasmim 
&vàse tadahu pavåranåys tayo bhikkhü vihsranti. atha 
kho tesam bhikkhünam etad ahosi: bhagavatå anufifidtam 
paficannam eamghe pavåretum, catunnam afifiamefifiam pa- 
våretum, шауай c’ amhå tayo janå. katham nu kho ашһеһї 
pavåretabban ti, bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujå- 
nami bhikkhave tipnannam aññamaññam pavåretum. evañ 
ca pana bhikihave pavåretabbam. vyattena . . . (= § 3) 


IV. 5. 4-9.] MAHÁVAGQOA. 163 


. ++ patikarissåmiti. |4|| tena kho pana samayena aññata- 
rasmim åvåse tadahu pavárenüya dve bhikkhü viharenti. 
atha kho tesam bhikkhünam etad ahosi: bhagavatå anufiflå- 
tam paficannam samghe pavüretum, catunnam aññamaññam 
pavåretum, tinpannam аййашаййат paváretum, mayaü о’ 
amhá dve janå. ketham nu kho ambehi pavaretabban ti. 
bhagavato etam айаш årocesum. anojånåmi bhikkhave 
dvinnam afifiamafifiam pevåretum. ||5|| evañ ca pana bhi- 
kkhave pavåretabbam. therena bhikkhunå ekamsam uttarå- 
sangam karitvå. ukkutikem nisiditvå afijalim poggahetvå 
navo bhikkbu evam assa vacaniyo: aham åvuso åyas- 
mantam paváremi ditthena và sutena vá parisank&ya và, 
vadatu mam åyaemå anukampam upádáya, passanto patika- 
risåmi. dutiyam pi . . . tatiyam pi åvuso . . . patikarissá- 
тїй. navakena bhikkhuná ekamsam . . . paggahetvå thero 
bhikkhu evam essa vacaniyo: sham bhante üyasmantam pa- 
våremi ditthena vå . . . dutiyam pi... tatiyam pi... 
patikarissåmiti. |6|| tene kho pana samayena afifiatarasmim 
Avåse tadahu pavåranåys eko bhikkhu viharati. atha kho 
tassa bhikkhuno etad ahosi: bhagavatå anuññátam pafica- 
nnam samghe pavåretum, catunnam aññamaññam paváre- 
tum, tinnannam aññamaññam pavüretum, dvinnam аййаш- 
аййаш pevåretum, shañ с’ ambi ekako.  kathem nu kho 
mayå pavåretabban ti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 
1711 idha репе bhikkhave afifiatarasmim &v&se tadahu pavå- 
ranåya eko bhikkhu vihereti. tena bhikkhave bbikkhunå 
yattha bbikkhü petikkamanti upetthånesålåya và mandape 
và rukkhamfile vá, sa deso sammejjitvå pàniyam paribbojani- 
yam upatthåpetvå dsanam paflflåpetvå padipam katvå nisidi- 
tabbam. васе afifie bhikkhû Agacchanti, tehi eaddhim pavå- 
retabbam, no ce Agacchanti, ajja me paváran& ”ti adhitthå- 
tabbam. по ce adhitthaheyya, åpstti dukkatassa. [|8] 
tatra bhikkhave yatthe рейса bhikkhü vibaranti, па ekassa 
pavåranam åharitvå catühi samghe pavåretabbam. pavå- 
reyyum ce, patti dukkatassa, tatra bhikkhave yattha 
cattáro bhikkhü viheranti, na ekassa paváranam åheritvå 
tihi вййашаййат pavåretabbam. pevåreyyum ce, ápatti 
dukkatassa. tatra bhikkhave yattha tayo bhikkhü viharanti, 


164 MAHAVAGGA. (IV. 5. 9-7. 2. 


na ekassa pavdranem åbaritvå dvihi aññamaññam pavare- 
tabbam. pavåreyyum ce, åpatti dukkatassa. tatra bhi- 
kkhave yattha dve bhikkhü viharanti, na ekassa pavdranam 
Bharitvà екепа adhitthátabbam. adbitthaheyye ce, åpatti 
dukksatasså 'ti 119181 


tena kho pana samayena efifiataro bhikkhu tadahu pavå- 
ranáys Apattim åpanno hoti. atha kho tassa bhikkhuno 
etad shoei: bhagavatá paññattam ne sápattikena pavåre- 
tabban ti, ahafi с’ amhi ápattim åpanno. katham nu kho 
mayá patipajjitabban ti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 
idha pana . . . (comp. IT. 27. 1, 2. Read tadahu pavürapáya 
instead of tadah’ uposathe) . . . patikerissåmiti vatvà pevå- 
Tetabbam, na tv eva tappaccayå pavåranåya antaråyo kütabbo 
"ti. 110 tena kho pana aarhayena afifiataro bhikkhu pavára- 
yamáno åpettim sarati. atha kho tassa bbikkhuno etad 
ahosi : bhagavatå paññattam na sápattikena paváretabban ti, 
ahañ с’ amhi åpattim ёраппо. Каћа nu kho mayá pati- 
pajjitabban ti.  bhegavato etam attham årocesum. idha 
pana bhikkbave bhikkhu paváreyamáno Apattim sarati. tene 
bhikkhave bbikkhunå såmantå bbikkhu evam ваза vacantyo : 
abam åvuso itthannåmem åpattim &panno, ito vutthehitvü 
tam Apattim patikariasAmiti vatvà pavåretabbam, na tv eva 
tappsccay& pavåranåya antaråyo kåtabbo. ||2|| idha pana 
bbikkhave bhikkhu pavårayamåno åpattiyå vematiko 
hoti. tena bhikkhave bhikkhun& . . . (comp. II. 27. 4-8) 
. . patikerissatiti vatvå paváretabbam, na tv eva tappacca- 
yå pavåranåye antaråyo kåtabbo "ti. 1311611 

petbamabhånevårem nitthitam. 


tena kho pana samayena aññatarasmim åvåse tadaha pavå- 
ranáys sambabulå å&våsikå bhikkhü ssnnipatimsu райса vå 
atirekA và, te na jánimsu atth’ аййе åvåsikå bhikkhü anåga- 
tå "ti. te dbammaesefiflino vinayasaflflino vaggå samagga- 
sañiñino pavåresum. tehi pavåriyamåne ath’ aññe åvåsikå 
bhikkhå ågacchimsu bahutarå. bhegavato etam attham Аго- 
cesum. |1] idha pana bhikkbave afifiatarasmim åvåse tad- 
ahu pavåranåye sambahulà &vüsiká bhikkhf sannipatanti 


IV. 7. 2-8, 2] MAHAVAGGA. 165 


рейса và atireká vå, te na jånanti atth’ аййе åvåsikå 
bhikkhüà anågatå ‘ti. te dhammasafifiino vinayassfifiino 
vaggå samaggasafiflino pavårenti. tehi pavåriyamåne 
ath’ aññe Avåsikå bhikkhü &gacchanti bahutarå. tehi bhi- 
kkhave bbikkhåbi puna pavåretabbam, paváritánam anápatti. 
021 idha pena bhikkhave afifiatarasmim &váse tadabu pavå- 
rapüya . . . tehi paváriyamáne ath’ aññe åvåsikå bbikkhå 
Agacchanti samasamá. pavåritå supavåritå, avasesehi pavå- 
retabbam, pavåritånam anåpatti. idhe pana bhikkhave аййа- 
tarasmim åvåse tadahu pavåranåya ... tebi pavåriyamåne 
ath’ аййе Avåsikå bhikkbü ёрассһепіі thokatar&. pavå- 
rità supavåritå, avasesehi pavåretabbam, pavåritånam anåpatti. 
l3! idha pana bhikkhave aññatarasmim &vàse tadahu pa- 
varanhya . . . tehi pavåritamatte ath’ aññe Avåsikå 
bhikkhü Agacchanti bahutar&. tehi bhikkheve bhikkbåbi 
puna paváretabbam, pavåritånem anåpatti. idha pana... 
tebi paváritamatte ath’ аййе åvåsikA bhikkhú &gacchenti 
samasamá.  pavürità supavåritå, tesam santike pavåre- 
tabbam, pevåritånem enåpatti. idha pene . . . tehi pavå- 
ritamette ath’ айде Avasikå bhikkhà &gacohanti thoka- 
tard. pavåritå supevåritå, tesam santike pavåretabbam, 
peváritànam anåpatti. |4] idha рапе . . . tehi pavåri- 
tamatte avutthitåya parisáya ath’ аййе,.. (= § 4) 
. ++ påvåritånam an@patti. idha pana... tehi pavári- 
tamatte ekaccáya vutthitdya рагівёув ... (=$ 4) 
. .. paváritánam anåpetti. idha рапа . . . tebi pavári- 
tamatte sabbåys vuttbitåya parisáya ... (= 6 4) 
. ++ pavåritånam anápatti. 161 
anåpattipennarssekem nitthitem. |17 || 


idha pana bhikkhave efifistarasmim åvåse tadahu pavå- 
тарйуа sambabulå åvåsikå bhikkhü sennipatenti рейса và 
atirekå và, te jánanti atth' айбе åvåsikå bhikkhü anágatà 
'ti. te dhammasaiifiino vinayassfifino vaggá vaggasafifiino 
pavürenti. tehi paváriyamáne ath’ аййе åvåsikå bhi- 
kkhü Agacchanti bahutarA. tehi bhikkhave bbikkhåbi 
puns pavéretabbam, paváritànam Зрабі dukkatessa. ||]|| 
idha pana . . . tehi pavåriyamåne ath’ afifie ávásikà 


166 MAHÁVAGGA. - [IV.& 2-11. 1. 


bhikkhü ågacchanti samasamá. pavåritå supavåritå, ava- 
sesehi pavåretabbam, pavåritånam åpatti dukkatassa, idha 
pana . . . tehi pavåriyamåne ath’ aññe åvåsikå bhikkhü 
&gacchanti thokatará. pavåritå supevåritå, avasesebi pa- 
våretabbam, pavåritånam åpatti dukketassa. | 2|| idha pana 
. . . tehi paváritamatte — la — avutthitåya perisåya — la — 
ekaccáya vutthitàya parisåya — la — sabbåya vutthitáya 
parisåya ath’ añño åvåsikå bhikkhü ágacchanti behutard 
— la — samesamá — la — thokstarå. pavåritå supevåritå, 
tesam santike pavåretabbam, pavåritånam Apatti dukka- 
tasea. 13 || 


vaggávaggasafifiinopannarasakam nittbitam. 1611 


idhe pana bbikkhave afiüataresmim &vüse tadahu pavára- 
nåya sambahulå &vüsikà bhikkhü sannipatanti райса vå 
atireké và, te jånanti atth' аййе åvåsikå bhikkhü an&gatá 
‘ti. te Шарра nu kho smhükam paváretum па nu kho 
kappatiti vematiká pavårenti. tehi pavåriyamåne ath’ 
afifie åvåsikå bhikkhü agacchanti bahutar&. tebi bhi- 
kkhave bhikkhühi puna pavdretabbam, pevåritånam patti 
dukkatassa. |11 idha pana . . . (comp. IV. 8. 2,3)... 
tesam eantike pavüretebbam, paváritànem åpatti dukka- 
(авва, |121 


vematikdpannarasakem nitthitem. |91 


idha pana bhikkhave afifiatarasmim åvåse tadahu pavåra- 
màye sambabulå åvåsikå bhikkhü sannipetanti рейса va 
atirekå vå, te jånenti atth' аййе åvåsikå bhikkhü anågetå 
"ti. te Карра eva amhåkam paváretum, n’ amhdkam ne 
kappatiti kukkuccapakatå pavárenti. tebi pavüriya- 
måne ath’ аййе åvåsikå bbikkhü Agacchanti bahutarå. 
tehi bhikkhave bbikkbåbi puna paváretabbam, paváritánam 
åpatti dukkatassa. ||l|| idha pana . . . (comp. IV. 8. 2, 3) 
+ + + tesam eantike pavåretabbam, pavåritånam åpatti dukka- 
tasaa. |1211 

kukkuccepeketápannarasaekam nitthitam. (101 


idha pena bhikkhave afiflatarasmim åvåse tadahu povå- 


IV. 11. 1-16 1.] MAHAVAGGA. 167 


ranåya sambabulå åvåsiké bhikkhQ sannipatanti райса va 
atirekå va, te jånanti atth' аййе åvåsikå bhikkhd andgaté 
71. te nassante te vinassante te ko tehi attho ”ti bheda- 
purekkhårå pavårenti. tehi pavåriyamåne ath’ айде 
åvåsikå bhikkhü ágacchanti bahutarå. tehi bhikkhave 
bhikkhühi puna paváretabbam, pavåritånam apatti thullacoa- 
yasea. 11] idha репе . . . (comp. IV. 8. 2, 8. Read Apatti 
thullaccayaesa instead of åpatti dukkatassa; in the case of 
Agacchanti samasamá read pavåritå supavåritå, avasesehi pa- 
våretabbam) . . . tesam santike pavåretabbam, pavåritånam 
Apatti thullaccayassa. ||2 || 

bhedapurekkhåråpannarssakam nitthitam. [|11 

paücasattetikem nittbitam. 


idha pana bhikkhave aññatarasmim &váse tadahu pavåra- 
p&ya sambahulå &v&siká bhikkhü sannipatanti райса vå 
atirekå vå, te jánanti aññe åvåsikå bhikkhü antostmam 
okkamantiti. te j&nenti аййе &vüsiká bhikkhd antosi- 
mam okkantå 'ü. te passanti afifle åvåsike bbikkhå 
antosimam okkamante. te passanti aññe åvåsike bhi- 
kkhü antosimam okkante. te sunanti аййе åvåsikå bhi- 
kkhå antosimam okkamantiti. te sunanti aññe åvåsikå 
bhikkhQ entosimam okkantá 'ti. Avdsikena åvåsikå eka- 
satapañcasattati tikanayato, åvåsikene ågantukå, &gantukena 
åvåsikå, &gantukena ågantukå, peyyålamukhens satta tikasa- 
tani honti. |11121 


idba pana bhikkhave åvåsikånam bhikkhünam cåtudda- 
so hoti, AgantukAnam pannaraeo ... (= II. 92. 1-99, 5. 
Read pavåretabbam, pavårenti, tadahu pavåranåye instead of 
uposatho kåtabbo, uposatham karonti, tedah’ uposathe) . . . 
ajj’ eva gantun ti. 111181 


na bhikkhave bbikkhuniyå nisinnaperisåya paváre- 
tabbam. yo pavåreyya, раі dukkatassa. па bhikkhave 
sikkhemånåye, ne s&manerasea, na s&maneriyb, na sikkbam 
paceakkhAtakasss, па antimavatthum sjjhåpsnnekesss ni- 
sinnaparisåyn paváretabbam. yo pavåreyye, Apatti dukka- 


168 MAHAVAGGA. [IV. 14. 1-18. 3. 


tama. [|1|| na Apattiyé adassane ukkhittakassa nisinnapari- 
såya pavåretabbam. yo pavåreyys, yatbådhammo kåretabbo. 
na åpattiyå appatikamme ukkhittakassa, na påpikåye ditthi- 
yå appatinissagge ukkhittakessa nisinnaperisåya pavåre- 
tabbam. yo ратёгеуув, yathådhammo kåretabbo. ||2|| па 
pandakassa nisinngparisiya pavåretabbam. уо pevüreyya, 
Apatti dukkatassa. na tbeyyasamvåsakasse, na titthiyapa- 
kkantakassa, na tiracchdpagatasea, na mAtughdtakassa, na 
pitughåtakassa, na arahentagbåtskesse, ne bhikkhuniddsa- 
kassa, па samghabhedakassa, ne lohituppådakassa, na ubhato- 
vyailjanakesss nisinnaparisåya pavåretabbam. yo pavåreyys, 
Apatti dukkatassa. ||3i| na bhikkhave pårivåsikassa pavara- 
nådånene pavåretabbam afifiatra avutthitàya parisåye. na 
ca bhikkhave apavårepnåya pavüretabbam aññatra samgha- 
såmaggiyå "ti. 141141 


tena kho pana вашауепе Kosalesu janapadesu afiflata- 
rasmim Вуйве tadehu pavérandya savarabhayakam ahosi. 
bhikkhü ndsakkbimeu tevücikem pavåretum. bhagavato 
etam attham frocesum.  enujünámi bbikkheve dveváci- 
kam pevüretun ti. bélhataram savarabbayakam ahosi. 
bhikkhü nfsakkhimsu dvevåcikam pavüretum. bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. anujindmi bhikkhave ekaváci- 
kam pevåretun ti. bá|hetaram savarabhayakam ahosi. 
bhikkhQ nåsakkhimsu ekevücikem paváretum. — bbagavato 
etam attham drocesum.  anujánámi bhikkhave samána- 
vassikam paváretun ti. |11 tena kho pana ватауепе 
afifistarasmim åvåse tadahu pevürepüya manussehi dánam 
dentehi yebhuyyena ratti khepitå hoti. atha kho tesam bhi- 
kkhünam etad ahosi: menuesebi dánam dentebi yebhuyyena 
ratti khepità. васе samgho tevåcikam pavåressati, apavårito 
"чв samgho bhaviesati, athüyam ratti vibbåyissati. ketham 
nu kho amhehi patipajjitabban ti. bhagavato etam attham 
årocesum. |21 idha pana bhikkhave afifiatarasmim åvåse 
tadahu pavårapåye manussehi dånam dentehi yebhuyyena 
ratti khepitá hoti. tatra ce bhikkhünam evam hoti: me- 
nussehi . . . vibbåyissatiti, vyattena bhikkbun& patibalena 
samgho fiüpetabbo: supatu me bhante samgho. manussehi 


IV. 18. 3-7] i MAHÅVAGGA. 169 


dånam dentehi yebhuyyena ratti khepitå. васе samgho te- 
våcikam pavåressati, apavårilo 'va samgho bhavissati, athå- 
yam ratti vibhüyiesati. yadi samghessa pattakellam, samgho 
dvevücikam ekavåcikam ssmånevassikam pavåreyyå "ti. [|8 
idha pana bhikkhave afifisterasmim åvåse tadahu pavåranå- 
ya bhikkhübi dhammam,bhanantehi suttantikebi suttantam, 
semgáyantehi vinayadharehi vinayam, vinicchinantehi dha- 
mmakathikehi dhammam, sákacchantehi bbikkhOhi kalaham 
karontehi yebhuyyena ratti khepitå hoti. tatra ce bbikkhá- 
nam evam hoti: bhikkhühi kalaham karontehi yebhuyyena 
ratti khepitå. васе eamgho tevicikam pavåressati, apavárito 
"va samgho bhavissati, atháyam ratti vibbåyissatiti, vyatte- 
na bhikkhuná petibalena eamgho fiåpetabbo: supátu me 
bhante samgho.  bhikkhühi kalaham . . . kbepitå. sace 
samgho tevåcikam pavüressaG, apavárito 'va aamgho bha- 
vissati, atháyam retti vibháyissati. yadi samghasas patta- 
kallam, samgho dvevácikam ekavåcikam samånavassikam pa- 
våreyyå "ti. [4 tena kho pana samayena Kosslesu 
janapedesu aññatarasmim åvåse tadahu pavárap&ya mahå 
bhikkhusamgho sannipatito hoti parittafi ca anovassikam 
hoti mahå ca megho uggato hoti. аа kho tesam bhikkhü- 
nam eted ahosi: ayam kho mabå bhikkhusamgho sannipatito 
рагійай ca anovessikam mahå ca megho uggato. васе 
samgho tevåcikam peváressati, apavårito 'va samgho bha- 
viseati, alhAyam megho pevassissati. katham nu kho amhe- 
hi patipajjitabban ti. bbagavato etam attham årocesum. ||5 || 
idha pane bhikkhave afifiatarasmim åvåse tadubu pavåranåya 
mabå bbikkhusamgho sannipatito hoti parittafi ca anovassi- 
kam hoti mahå ca megho uggato hoti. tatra ce bhikkhünam 
evam hoti: ayam kho mabå . . . (= 85) .. . pavassissatiti, 
vyattena bbikkhunå patibalena samgho ñåpetabbo: eupátu me 
bhante samgho. ayam mah&... paveasissati. yadi samghasea 
pattakallam, eamgho dvevåcikam ekavåcikam samånevassi- 
kam pavåreyyå "ti. |61 idha pana bhikkhave aññatarasmim 
Avåse tadabu pavåranåye rájantaráyo hoti — la — corantar&- 
yo h., agyantaråyo h., udakant. h., manussant. h., amanussant. 
h., véjant. b., sirimsapant. h., jivitant. h., brabmacariyanta- 
råyo hoti. tatra ce bhikkhûnam evam hoti: ayam kho brah- 


170 MAHÅVAGGA. (IV. 18. 7-16. 4. 


macariyantaråyo. васе samgho tevåcikam pevåressati, apa- 
vårito 'va samgho bhavissati, atbåyam brahmacariyantaráyo 
bhevissstiti, vyettens bhikkhun& patibalena samgho ñåpe- 
tabbo: sunátu me bhante samgho. ayam brahmacariyanta- 
råyo. васе samgho tevåcikam pavåressati, apavürito ’va 
eamgho bhavissati, etháyam brehmacariyanterüyo bbevissa- 
ti. yadi samghasss pattakallam, samgho dvevücikam eka- 
våcikam samünavassikam pavåreyyå "ti. 171151 


tens kho pena samayens ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü så- 
pattikå pavürenti. bhagavato etam attham Grocesum. па 
bhikkhave sápattikena pavåretabbam. уо pavå- 
reyys, åpatti dukkstassa. anujånåmi bhikkhave yo såpa- 
ttiko pevåreti, tassa okåsam kåråpetvå &pettiyá codetun 
ti. [1] tena kho pana samayena ohabbaggiyéå bhi- 
kkhü okåsam kåråpiyemånå na icchanti okåsam kåtum. 
bhagaveto etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave 
okåsam akarontassa pavåranam thapetum. evañ ca 
pana bhikkhave thapetabbá. tadahu pavárap&ya cátuddase 
vå pannarase và tasmim puggale sammukhibhüte samgha- 
majjhe udåharitabbam : eun&tu me bhante samgho. itthen- 
nåmo puggalo såpattiko, tassa pavdranam (hapemi, na 
tasmim sammukbibhåte paváretabban ti thapité hoti pavå- 
rapá ti. 121 tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyå bbi- 
kkhü pur’ amhákam peealá bhikkhü pevárapam thapenti- 
ti patigaco’ eva suddhánam bhikkhdnam anåpattikånam 
avattbusmim akårane pavárapam thaspenti peváritànam pi 
pavåranam thapenti. bbagavate etam attham drocesum. 
na bhikkhave suddbånam bhikkhünam enápattikánam ava- 
tthusmim akérane pavåranå thepetabbà. yo thspeyye, åpatti 
duklatassa, na bhikkhave pavåritånem pi pavåranå thape- 
tabbå. уо thapeyys, Apatti dukkatassa. |31] evam kho bhi- 
kkbave thapitå hoti pavåranå, evam atthapità. kathafi ca 
bhikkhave attbapitå hoti pavåranå. tevAcikAya co bhikkhave 
pavåranåya bhåsitåya lapitdya periyositåya pavåransm tha- 
peti, atthapitå hoti pavårenå. dvevåcikåya ce bhikkhave, 
ekavåsikåya co bhikkhave, samånevassikåye co bhikkhave pa- 
våranéya bbåsitåye lepitàya pariyoeitáya pavaragam thapeti, 


IV. 10. 4-10.] MAHÅVAGGA. 171 


atthapitá hoti pavåranå. evam kho bhikkhave stthapitå 
hoti pavåranå. ||4|| kathañ ca bhikkhave thapitá hoti pavå- 
ranå. tevåcikåya ce bhikkhave pavárapáya bhåsitåya lapitå- 
уз pariyositåya pevåranem thapeti, tbapitå hoti pevåranå. 
dvevåcikåya co bhikkhave, ekavücikáya ce bhikkhave, samå- 
navasikáya ce bhikkhave pevåranåye bhüsitáya lapitàya 
apariyositåya pavárapam thepeti, Һара hoti pavåranå. 
evam kho bhikkhave thapité hoti pevåranå. ||5|| idha pana 
bhikkhave tadehu pavårapåye bhikkhu bhikkhussa pavå- 
теда thapeti. tam ce bhikkhum аййе bhikkhü j&nanti 
ayam kho åyasmå aperisuddhakåyasamåcåro aparisuddhave- 
cisamåcåro aparisuddhaåjivo bàlo avyatto na patibalo anu- 
yufljiyamåno anuyogam dåtun ti, alam bhikkbu, må bhanda- 
nam må kalaham má viggaham má vivådan ti omadditvå 
samghens paváretabbam. ||6|| idha pana bhikkhave tadahu 
pavårsnåya bhikkhu bbikkhussa pavárapam thapeti. tam ce 
bhikkhum аййе bbikkhü jánanti ayam kho åyssmå pari- 
suddhakåyasamåcåro aparicuddhavactsamacéro aparisuddhe- 
&jivo bàlo avyatto na patibalo anuyufljiyamåno anuyogam 
datun ti, alam bhikkhu . . . paváretabbam. ||7|| idha pana 
bhikkhave tadahu pavåranåye bbikkbu bhikkhussa pavára- 
nam tbapeti. tam се bbikkhum aiite bhikkhü jånanti ayam 
kho fyasmA perisuddhakáyasamácàro perisuddhavaciearná- 
chro aparisuddhaåjivo bàlo avyatto na patibalo anuyufijiya- 
тоёоо anuyogam dAtun ti, slam bhikkhu . . . paváretabbam. 
1181 idba pana bhikkhave tadahu pavårenåye bhikkhu bhi- 
kkbussa pavárenam tbapeti. tam ce bhikkbum аййе bhi- 
kkhü jånanti ayam kho âyasmå parisuddhekåyesamåcåro 
parisuddhavecisamåcåro parisuddheåjivo Бо avyetto na 
patibelo anuyufljiyamåno anuyogam dåtun ti, alam bhi- 
kkhu . . . pavåretsbbam. |191 idha pana bhikkbave tad- 
ahu pevåranåya bhikkhu bbikkhusss pavårsnam f{hape- 
ti. tam ce bbikkhum aññe bbikkht jånanti ayam kho 
&ysamá parisuddhak&yasamácüro parisuddhavacisamåcåro pa- 
risuddhsá&jivo panpdito vyatto patibalo anuyufljiyamåno 
enuyogam dåtun ti, eo evam assa vacaniyo: yam kho 
tvam åvuso imasaa bhikkhuno pavürspam thapesi, kimbi 
nam thapesi, silavipattiyA thapesi, &cáravipattiy& thapesi, 


172 MABAVAGGA. (IV. 16. 10-16. 


ditthivipattiyà tbepesiti. |101 so ce evam vadeyya: sł- 
lavipattiyå thapemi, åcåravip. th., dittbivip. thapemiti, 
so evam assa vacaniyo: jånåti panåyasmå silavipattim, 
ján&ti bcåravipettim, ján&ti ditthivipattin ti. во ce evam 
vadeyya: jánámi kho aham åvuso silavipattim, ján&mi åcå- 
ravipattim, jånåmi ditthivipattin ti, so evam assa vacani- 
yo: katamå panåvuso eilavipatti, katamå &cáravipatti, katamå 
ditthivipatttti. |11|| so ce evam vadeyya : cattåri ca påråji- 
Капі teresa eamghádisesà ayam silevipetti, thullaccayam på- 
cittiyam påtidesaniyam dukkatam dubbhásitam ayam åcåra- 
vipatti, micchádittbi antaggåhikå ditthi ayam dittbivipattiti, 
во evam assa vacaniyo: yam kho tvam ávuso imassa bhi- 
kkhuno pavåranam tbapesi, dittbena thapesi, sutena thapesi, 
parisañkáya thapesiti. |1121 во се evam vadeyya: ditthena vA 
thapemi, sutena vå thapemi, perisaikåya và thapemiti, so 
evam asss vacaniyo: yam kho tvam åvuso imassa bhikkhu- 
no ditthena pavárapam thapesi, kim te dittham, kinti te 
dittham, kadå te dittham, kattha te dittham, påråjikem ajjbå- 
pajjanto dittho, samghådisesam ajjhåpajjanto dittho, thulla- 
ecayam påcittiyam p&tidesaniyam dukkatam dubbhásitam 
ajjbåpajjanto dittho, kattha ca tvam ahosi, kattha cAyam 
bhikkhu ahosi, kim ca tvam karosi, kim cåyam bhikkhu 
karotiti. 11181 so ce evam vadeyya: na kho aham &vuso 
imassa bhikkhuno ditthena pavåranam thapemi, api ca su- 
tena pavåranam thapemiti, во evam assa vacapiyo: yam kho 
tvam Avuso imassa bhikkhuno sutena paváranam thapesi, 
kim te sutam, kinti te sutam, kadå te sutam, kattha te sutam, 
påråjikam ajjhápanno ‘ti sutam, samgbådisesam ajjhApanno 
‘ti sutam, thullaccayam påcittiyam påtidesaniyam dukkatam 
dubbhásitam sjjbåpanno "і sutam, bhikkhuess eutam, bhi- 
kkbuniyå s., sikkbamånåya s., e&manerassa s., såmaneriyå a., 
upüsakassa s., upåsikåya s., rájünam s., råjamahåmettånem 
8., titthiyánam a., titthiyasåvakånam sutan ti. ||14) во ce 
evam vadeyye : na kho aham åvuso imassa bhikkhuno sute- 
na pavåranam thapemi, api са рагівапкёуа pavdranam tha- 
pemiti, eo evam assa vacanfyo: yam kho tvem Avuso imasea 
bhikkhuno perisanküya pevåranam thapesi, kim parisankasi, 
kinti parisafikesi, kadá parisankasi, kattha parisankasi, pårå- 


IL 16. 16-20.] MAHÁYAGGA. 173 


jikam ajjbåpanno ’ti perisankasi, eamgb&disesam ajjbápanno 
"ti parisankasi, thullaccayam påoittiyam påtidesanivam du- 
kkatam dubbhásitam ajjhåpanno 'ti parisankasi, bhikkhussa 
sutvà perisankasi . . . titthiyasåvakånam sutvá parisanka- 
siti.|16|| во се evam vadeyya: na kho aham åvuso imassa 
bhikkhuno parisankáya pavåranam thapemi, api са aham na 
jånåmi kena aham imassa bbikkhuno pavárapam thapemiti, 
so ce bbikkhave codako bhikkhu anuyogena viüfiünam sa- 
brahmacårinam cittam ов årådbeti ananuvådo cudito bbi- 
kkhO ’ti alam vacandya. во ce bhikkhave codako bhikkhu 
anuyogena vilüüünam ssbrahmacarinam cittam årådheti så- 
nuvádo cudito bhikkbå 'ti alam vacenåya. ||16|| во ce bhi- 
Akhave codsko bhikkhu smålakena påråjikens anuddhamsi- 
tam patijånåti, samghådisesam ropetvå samghena pavåre- 
tabbam. во ce bhikkbave codako bhikkhu amålakens sam- 
ghådisesena anuddhamsitam patiján&ti, yathü&dhammam kårå- 
petvå samghena pavåretabbam. во ce bhikkbave codako 
bhikkhu amålakene thullaccayena pácittiyena patidesantyena 
dukkatena dubbháüsitena anuddhamsitam patijánáti, yatbå- 
dbammam kåråpetvå samgbena pevåretsbbam. ||l7|| so ce 
bhikkhave cudito bhikkhu påråjikam ajjh&panno "ti patiján&- 
ti, nÅsetvå sarnghena pavåretabbam. so ce bhikkbave cudito 
bhikkhu samgbádisesam ajjhApanno "ti patijånåti, samghådi- 
sesam ropetvå samghena pavåretabbam. во се bhikkhave 
cudito bbikkbu tbullaccayam påcittiyam påtidesanfyem 
dukkatam dubbhasitam ајјһараппо 'ti patijánáti, yatha- 
dhammam kåråpetvå samghena pavåretabbam. |1811 idha 
рапа bhikkhave bhikkhu tadahu paváranáya thullaccayam 
sjjbåpanno hoti. ekacce bhikkhå thullaccayaditthino honti, 
ekacoe bhikkhü samghådisesedittbino honti. ye te bbi- 
kkhave bhikkhü thullaccayaditthino, tehi so bhikkhave 
bhikkhu eksmantem apanetvA yath&dhammam kåråpetvå 
samgham upasamkamitvå evam assa vacaniyo: yam kho so 
&vuso bhikkhu &pattim &panno, såssa yathádhammam patika- 
tå. yadi samghassa pattakallam, samgho pevåreyyå 'ti. 11911 
idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu tadahu paváranáya thullacca- 
yam ajjhápenno hoti. ekacce bhikkhd thullsccaysditthino 
honti, ekacee bhikkhü påcittiyadittbino honti. екассо bhi- 


174 MAHÅVAGGA. LIV. 16. 20-26. 


kkhå thullaccayaditthino honti, ekacce bhikkhü patidesant- 
yaditthino honti. ek. bh. thullaccayad. b., ek. bh. dukka- 
tad. h., ek. bh. thullaccayad. h., ek. bh. dubbhåsitad. h. 
ye te bhikkhave bhikkhü thnllaocayaditthino, tehi . . . 
(= $ 19)... samgho pavåreyyå 'ti. 20i} idha pana bhi- 
kkhave bhikkhu tadahu pavåranåye påcittiyam ajjbápanno 
hoti, pátidesaniyam ajjháp. hoti, dukkatam ajjbáp. hoti, 
dubbhåsitam ajjh&p. hoti. ekacce bhikkhå dubbhåsitaditthi- 
no honti, ekucce bhikkhü samghádisesaditthino honti. ye te 
bhikkhave bhikkhü dubbhåsitaditthino, tehi . . . (= 19) 
. . . samgho pavåreyyå 'ti. [|21|| idha pana bhikkhave 
bhikkhu tadabu paváranàya dubbhåsitam ajjh&panno hoti. 
ekacce bhikkhü dubbhåsitaditthino honti, ek. bh. thullaoca- 
yad. h., ek. bh. dubbbåsitad. h., ek. bh. påcittiyad. h., ek. 
bh. dubbhåsitad. h., ek. bh. pátidesaniyad. h., ek. bb. da- 
bbhåsitad. h., ek. bh. dukkatad. honti. ye te bhikkhave bhi- 
kkhà dubbhåsitaditthino, tebi . . . samgho pavåreyyå 'ti. 122] 
idha pana bhikkhave bbikkhu tadahu pavårepåye samgha- 
majjhe udáhareyya: sunàtu me bhante samgho. idam 
vatthum paflüüyati na puggalo. yadi samghassa patta- 
kallam, vatthum tbapetvå samgho pavåreyyå 'ti. so evam 
asea vacantyo: bhagavatà kho Avuso visuddhánam pavåranå 
раййвИ&. васе vatthum paññáyati na puggalo, idán' eva 
nam vedehiti.|23|| idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu tadahu 
pavåranåya samghamajjhe udåhereyya: sun&tu me bhante 
eamgho. 'ayam puggalo pafiflåyati na vatthum. yadi eam- 
ghassa pattakallam, puggalam tbapetvå samgho pavåreyyå 
"ti, во avam assa vacaniyo: bhagavatå kho Avuso samaggá- 
nam pavåranå paññattå. sace puggalo pafifidyati ne vatthum, 
idan’ eva nam vadehiti. |241 idbs pana bhikkhave bhikkhu 
tadahu pavårsnåye samghamajjhe udåhareyya: sunita me 
bhante samgho. idam vatthuiü ca puggalo ca paññåyati. 
yadi samgbasa pattakallam, vatthun ca puggalefi ca thapetvå 
samgho pavåreyyå ”ti. so evam assa vacaniyo: bhagavatå kho 
Avuso visuddhánafi ca sameggünaü ca pavåranå pefilattá. 
sace vatthufi ca puggalo ca pañññyati, idán' eva nam vadehl- 
ti.|26|| pubbe ce bhikkbave pavåranåys vatthum paññaya- 
ti, pecobå puggalo, kallan vacanåya. pubbe ce bhikkhave 


1V. 16. 26-17. 4.] MAHAVAGGA. 175 


pavåranåya puggalo paiifidyati, pacch& vatthum, kallam va- 
сапёув. pubbe ce bhikkbave ратёгађдуа vatthuil ca pugga- 
lo ca pafifidyati, tam ce katåye paváran&ya ukkoteti, ukkota- 
nakam påcittiyan ti. [126] 1611 р 


tens kho pans ватвуепа sambehulå sanditthå sambhattå 
bhikkhd Kosalesn janspadesu aññatarasmim åvåse vassam 
upegacchimsu. tesam såmantå aññe bhikkhà bhandana- 
kårskå kslahakárak& vivådakårskå bhassakårakå samghe 
adhiksrenakårakå vassam upagaochimsu mayam tesam bhi- 
kkhünam vassam vutthánam pevåranåya pavéranam tha- 
pessåmå 'ti. assosum kho te bhikkhü: amhákam kira 
sámantá aññe bhikkhü bhandanakfrakA . . . adhika- 
ranakårakå vassam upagaté meyam . . . fhepessåmå "ti. 
katham nu kbo ambebi patipajjitabban ti.  bhagavato 
etam attham Grocesum. ||l| idha pana bhikkhave sam- 
bahulå sanditth4 sambhattà bhikkhü afifiatarasmim Åvåse 
vassam upagacchanti. tesam sàmantá aññe bhikkhü bhanda- 
nakfraké . . . adbikaranakáraká vassam upagecchanti ma- 
yam ... thapessám& 'ti. annjånåmi bhikkhave tehi bhi- 
kkhåbi dve tayo uposathe cåtuddasike kåturn katham mayam 
tehi bhikkhühi pathamataram pavåreyyåmå 'ti. te ce bhi- 
kkhave bhikkhü bhandanskáreká . . . adbikarapnakårekå 
&v&sam ågacchanti, tehi bhikkhave åvåsikebi bhikkhühi la- 
hum-lahurn sannipatitvå pavåretabbam, pavåretvå vattabbå: 
pavåritå kho mayam Åvuso, yathåyssmantå maññanti tathå 
karontå ”ti. |2] te ce bhikkhave bhikkhà bbandanakårakå 
. . . adbiksranakåreké asamvihità tam Avasam &ågacchanti, 
tehi bhikkhave åvåsikehi bhikkhühi Asanam pafiflåpetabbam, 
pådodskam pádepitham pAdakathalikam upanikkhipitabbam, 
peccuggantvé pettacivaram patiggahetabbam, pániyona pu- 
cchitabbé, tesam vikkhitvå nissimam gantvå pavåretsbbam, 
pavåretvå vattabbi: pavåritå kho mayam åvuso, yathå- 
yasmantå maññanti tatbå karontd 'ti. ||3]| evañ ce tam 
labbetha, ice etam kusalam, no ce labbetba, &vüsikena bhi- 
kkhuná vyattena patibalena åvåsikå bhikkhO fiåpetabbå: eu- 
nantu me åyasmantå &vüsik& yad’ üyasmentánam patta- 
kallam, idåni uposatham kareyyåma påtimokkham uddiseyyå- 


176 MAHAVAGGA. (IV. 17. 4-19. 1. 


ma, ågame ká]e pavåreyyåmå 'ü. te co bhikkhave bbikkhå 
bhapdanekárská . . . edhikarapakárak& te bhikkhü evam 
vadeyyum : sádh' &vuso idán' eva no pavårethå 'ti, te evam 
assu vacaniyå : anissarå kho tumhe åvuso ambåkam pavåra- 
ņåya, na tåva moyam pavåressåmå 'ti. ||| te ce bhikkbave 
bbikkhü bhandanakårekå . . . adhikaranakårskå tam kAjam 
enuvaseyyum, åvåsikena bhikkhave bhikkhuná vyattena 
patibalena Avåsikå bhikkhü üápetabbá: supsntu me Ayas- 
mantå . . . uddiseyyåme, ågame junhe pavåreyyåmå ”ti. te 
ce bhikkhave bhikkhà bhapdsnakårekå . . . adhikaranakA- 
rakå te bbikkhü evam vadeyyum: s&db' åvuso idan’ eva no 
pavårethå 'ti, te evam assu vacaniyà: anissarå kho tumhe 
åvuso amhåkem pavåranåya, na tava mayam pavåressåmå "ti. 
151 te ce bhikkhave bhikkhü bhendanekàárakà . . . adhi- 
karanakáraká tam pi junham anuvaseyyum, tebi bhikkhave 
bhikkhühi sabbeh' eva ágame juphe komudiyå cåtumåsiniyk 
&kAmá pavåretabbam. 16 tehi ce bhikkhave bbikkhåhi 
pavåriyamåne giláno agilánasss pavársnam thapeti, so evam 
essa vacaniyo: åyasmå kho gilåno, gilano ca ananuyogakkha- 
mo vutto bhbagavatá. &gamehi åvuso yåva årogo hosi, årogo 
Akenkhamáno oodessasiti. evam ce vuccamåno codeti, anåda- 
riye påcittiyam. ||7|| tehi ce bhikkhave bhikkbåbi paváriya- 
måne agiláno gilAnassa pavåranom thapeti, so evam assa va- 
caniyo: ayam kho åvuso bhikkhu gilåno, gilåno са ananuyo- 
gakkhamo vutto bhagavat& ågamebi åvuso yåvåyam bhi- 
kkhu årogo hoti, årogam åkafikhamåno codesssafti. evam ce 
vuccamáno codeti, anådariye påoittiyam. ||Bl| tehi ce bhi- 
kkhave bhikkhühi paváriyemáne gilåno gilánassa pavàrenam 
thapeti, so evam assa vacaniyo: åyasmentå kho gilán&, gilå- 
no ca ananuyogakkhamo vutto bhagavaté. ågamebi åvuso 
yåva årogå hothe, årogam ákankhamáno codessasiti. evam 
се vuccamüno codeti, anådariye pacittiyam.||9l| tehi ce bhi- 
kkhave bhikkhübi pavåriyamåne agilåno egilånassa pavå- 
тепа thapeti, ubho samghena samanuyufijitvà samanuggå- 
hitvà ysthádhammam kåråpetvå samghena pavåretabban 
ti. 1101171 


tena kho pane вашауепа sambabulå sanditthå sambhettå 


EV. 18, 1-5.] MAHÅVAGGA. 177 


bhikkhü Kosalesu janapadesu afiflatarasmim åvåse тамат 
upagacchimsu. tesam samaggánam sammodamånånam avi- 
vedamånånam viharatam аййаїаго phásuviháro adhigato 
hoti. atha kho tesam bhikkhünam etad аһові: ambå- 
kam kho samaggånam . . . adhigato. sace mayam idáni 
pavåressåma, siyåpi bhikkhü pavåretvå odrikam pakkame- 
yyum, evam mayam imamhå phåsuvibårå paribåbirå bha- 
vissåma. katbam nu kho amhehi patipajjitabban ti. bhagava- 
to etam attham årocesum. ||1 || idha pana bhikkhave samba- 
hulà sandittbå sambhattà bhikkhü aüilataresmirn åvåse vassam 
upagsochanti, tesam samaggánam .. . edhigato hoti, tatra 
ce bhikkhüpam evam hoti: amhékam kho samaggánam . . . 
paribåhirå bhevissåmå 'ti. anujånåmi bhikkhave tehi bhi- 
kkhühi pavårepåsemgsham kåtum. 12| evañ ca pana 
bhikkhave kitabbo. sabbeh' eva ekajjham eannipatitabbam, 
sannipatitvå vyattena bhikkhun& patibalena samgho fApe- 
tabbo: supåtu me bhante samgho. amhükam samaggånam 
sammodamünánam avivadamánànam viharatam aññataro phå- 
auvibåro adhigato. sace mayam idåni pavüressáma, siyåpi 
bbikkhü pavåretvå cårikam pakkameyyum, evam mayam 
imambå pbåsovihårå peribåbirå bhavissáma, yadi samghasea 
pattakallam, samgho pevåranåsamgaham kareyya, idåni upo- 
satham kareyye påtimokkham uddiseyye, game komudiya 
cåtumåsiniyå samgho pavåreyya. eså üatti. |31 sunitu me 
bhante samgho. ambåkam sameggénam . . . paribåbirå bha- 
vissåma. samgho pavüraepásamgaham karoti, id&ni uposa- 
tham karissti påtimokkham uddisissati, Agame komudiyå 
cAtumAsiniy& pavaressati. yassåyasmato khamati pavåranå- 
samgahassa keranam idáni uposatham karissati patimokkham 
uddisissati, igame komudiyå cåtumåsiniyå pavdresasti, so 
tunb' essa. yassa ne kkhamati, so bháseyya. kato samghe- 
na pevåranåsamgaho idåni uposatham keriasati påtimokkham 
uddisissati, Agame komudiyå cåtumåsiniyå pav&ressati. kha- 
mati samghasea, tasmå tunhi, evam etam dhårayåmiti. 1411 
tehi ce bhikkhave bhikkbühi kate pavåranåsamgabe аййа- 
taro bhikkhu evam vadeyya: icobåm' abam Avuso janapa- 
dacárikam pakkamitum, atthi me janapade kareniyau ti, во 
evam assa vacaniyo: sidh’ åvuso pavåretvå gacohåbiti. so 
12 


178 MAHÅVAGGA. ПҮ. 10. 5-4. 


ce bhikkhave bbikkhu pavårsyamåno añðatarassa bhikkhuno 
pavåranam thapeti, so evam авла vacaniyo: anissaro kho me 
tvam åvuso pavåranåye, па tåvåham pavåressåmiti. tassa oe 
bhikkhave bhikkhuno pavårayamånassa efifiataro bhikkhu 
tassa bhikkhuno pavåranam thapeti, ubho samghena samanu- 
yufljitvå samaunuggåbitvå yathddhammam kåråpetabbå. [5] 
so ce bhikkhave bhikkhu janapade tam karapiyam tiretvå 
punad eva anto komudiyå cåtumåsiniyå tam åvåsam &gaocha- 
ti, tehi ce bhikkhave bhikkhübi pavåriyamåne afiiataro bhi- 
kkbu tassa bhikkhuno pavåranam thapeti, во evam аа va- 
caniyo: anissaro kho ше tvam Åvuso pavåranåya, pavårito 
ahan ti. tehi ce bhikkhave bhikkhühi peváriyamáne so 
bhikkhu aññatarassa bhikkhuno pavárapam thapeti, ubho 
samghbene samsnuyufijitvå samanuggåhitvå yath&dhammam 
kåråpetvå samghena peváretabben ti. |16118 
pavaranakkhandhakam catuttham. 


imamhi khandhake vatthu ohacattárisá. tassa uddånam : 
vassam vuttbå Kosalesu agamum satthu dassanam 
apbåaupasusamvåsam afifliømafifiånolomatå,| 
pavårentåpanå, dve ca, kammam, gildna-fidtakA, 
råjå, corå ca, dhuttà ca, bhikkhf paocatthikA tathå,| 
pafica, catu, tayo, dve, "Ко, åpanno, vemati, sari, 
sabbo samgho, vematiko, bahü samá ca thokikå,/ 
fvåsikå, cåtuddaså, liiga-samvåsakå ubho, 
gantabbam, na півіппёув, chandadån', apavåranå,| 
savarehi, khepitå, megho, antarå ca, pavåranå,| 
na karonti, pur’ amhákam, attbapitå ca, bhikkhuno,| 
kimbi vå 'ti katamafi ca ditthena sutasankAya, 
codako cuditako ca, thullaccaya-vatthu-bhandanam,| 
pavåranåsamgaho ca, anissaro, paváraye "ti. 


= 


179 


MAHAVAGGA. 


ү. 


Tena samayena buddho bhagavá Rájagahe viharati 
Gijjhaktte pabbete. tena kho pana samayena råjå Mà- 
gadho Beniyo Bimbisåro asitiyå gåmasahassesu issarå- 
dhipaccam rajjam kåreti. tena kho pana samayena Campà- 
yam Sono nåma Koliviso setthiputto sukhumálo hoti, 
{алаа pådatalesu lomåni jåtåni honti. atha kho råjå Mága- 
dho Seniyo Bimbisåro {Апі asitim gåmikasabassåni sannipa- 
tåpetvå kenacid eva karantyena Sonasss Kolivisassa santike 
dütam påhesi, ágacchatu Bono icchámi Sonassa Agatan ti. || 1 |] 
atha kho Sonassa Kolivisasea måtåpitaro Sonam Kolivisam 
etad avooum: råjå te tata Sona pide dakkhitukámo. må 
kho {таш tåts Sons yena råjå tena рабе abhippesåreyyåsi, 
rafifio pursto pallaiikens пївїйв, nisinnassa te råjå påde 
dakkhissatiti. etha kho Sonam Kolivisam sivikåya Anesum. 
atha kho Sopo Koliviso yens råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbiså- 
ro ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvà rájánam Magadham 
Seniyam Bimbisåram abbivådetvå rañño purato pallankena 
nisidi  addasa kho гаја Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro Sonassa 
Kolivisases p&datalesu lomåni jåtåni. |2| atha kho råjå 
Mågadho Вепіуо Bimbisåro tani asitim gåmikassbessåni 
ditthedhammike atthe anusåsitvå пууојеві : tumhe khv attha 
bhane mayé ditthadhammike atthe anusåsitå, gacchatha tam 
bhagavantam peyirupåsathe, so no bhegavå samparåyike 
atthe anusásissat!ti. athe kho tåni asiti gümikasahassñni 
yena Gijjbaküto pabbato ten’ upasamkamimsu. 11311 tena 
kho pans samayena áyasmá Sågato bhagavsto upatthüko 
hoti. atha kho (Апі asiti gümikasahassáni yenåyesmå Sågato 
ten’ upasamkamimsu, upassmkamitvå Ayasmantam Sågatam 


180 MAHÅVAGGA. [V-1.49. 


А svocum: imåni bhante asiti gümikasahassüni idh’ 

tåni bhagavantam dassanåys. — südhu mayam 
inate labheyyáma bhagavantam dassanåyå 'ti. tena bi 
tumhe åyasmanto muhuttam idh’ eva tava hotha yüvüham 
bhagnvantam pativedemiti. ||4|| atha kho åyasmå Ságato 
tesam asitiyå gámikasahassánam purato pekkhamånånam på- 
tikAya nimujjitvå bhagavato purato ummujjitvå bhagavantam 
etad avoca: imåni bhante asiti gámikasahamsÁni idh' upa- 
samkantåni bhagavantam dassanéye, yassa dani bhante bha- 
gavå kálam mefifiatiti. tene hi {таш Sågata vibårapacchå- 
yåyam sanam раййареһіб. |161 evam bhante 'ti kho 
Ayasmå Sågato bhagavato patisunitvå pitham gabetvå bha- 
gavato purato nimujjitvà tesam asitiyå gåmikssahassånam 
purato pekkhamånånam påtikåye ummujjitvå vihårapacohå- 
yåyam åsanam pefifidpesi. atha kho bhagava vihårå nikkha- 
mitvå vihårapacchåyåyam paññatte Asane nistdi. |61 atha 
kho tåni asiti gåmikesshassåni yena bhagavå ten’ upa- 
samkemimsu, wupesamkamitvå bhegaventam  abhivádetvà 
ekamantarp nisidimsu. atha kho tani asiti gåmikasshemåni 
åyaamantam yeva Bågatam samannåheranti, no tathå bhaga- 
vantam. atha kho bhegavá tesam åsitiyå gåmikasahassånam 
cetasá cetoparivitakkam аййдув åyasmantam Sågatam &man- 
tesi: tene hi tvam Sågata bhiyyosomattåya uttarimanusss- 
dhammam iddhipåtihåriyam dassebiti. evam bhante 'ti kho 
&yasmá Sågato bhagavato patisunitvå vehdsam abbhuggantvå 
åkåse antalikkhe cankamati pi titthati pi nisidati pi seyyam 
pi kappeti dhüpàáyati pi pajjaleti рі antaradbåyati pi. 17 || 
atha kho åyasmå Sågato åkåse antalikkhe anekavihitam utta- 
rimanusaadhammam iddhipåtihåriyam dassetvà bhagavato 
püdeeu eiraså nipatitvå bhagavantam etad avoca: satthå me 
bhante bhagavå, sávako ”ham asmi, satthå me bhante bha- 
gavå, süveko "ham asmiti. atbe kho tani asiti gámikasa- 
hassáni acchariyam vata bho, abbhutam vata bho, såvako pi 
nama evam mahiddhiko bbavissati evam mahånubbåvo, aho 
nina satthå 'ti bhagavantam yeva samannåharanti, no tathå 
&yasmantam Sågatam. |811 stha kho bhagavå tesam asitiyå 
gåmikssahassåuam cetaså cetoparivitekkam aññáya anu- 
pubbikatbam kathesi seyyath' idam: dånakathem eilakatham 


V.1.9-12.) MAHÅVAGGA. 181 


eaggakatham kámánam ådinavem okåram samkilesam ne- 
kkhamme ånisamsam pekásesi. yadå te bhagavå afifidsi 
kallacitte muduoitte vinivaranacitte udaggaoitte pasannacitte, 
Atha yA buddhánam sámukkamsikà dhammadesaná tam pa- 
kAsesi, dukkham samudayam nirodham maggam. seyyathå- 
pi оёша euddham уа аш epegatakåjakam sammad eva 
rajapam petiganheyye, evam eva tesam asitiyå gámikasa- 
hassánam tasmim yeva Åsane virsjam vitamalam dhamma- 
cakkhum wudapådi yam kifici samudayadhammam sabbam 
tam nirodhedhamman ti. I91 te ditthadhammå patta- 
dhammá viditadhammá pariyogå]badbammå tinnpavioikiochå 
vigatakathamkatha vesårajjappattå aparappaccayå satthu så- 
sane bhagavantam etad avooum : abhikkantam bhante, abhi- 
kkantam bhante, seyyathápi bhante nikkujjitam và ukku- 
ijeyye, paticchannam và vivareyys, mü]hassa và maggam 
Acikkheyya, andhakåre vå telapajjotam dhåreyya cakkhu- 
manto råpåni dakkhintiti, evam eva bhagavatå anekapariyå- 
yens dhammo pakfsito. ete msyam bhante bhagavantam 
saranam gacchima dhammañ ca bhikkhusamghafi ca, upå- 
sake no bhagavå dhåretu ajjatagge pånupete saranam gate 
"ti. 1101 atha kho Sonassa Ko]ivisassa etad ahosi: yathå 
-yathå kho aham bhegavetå dhammam desitam Ajün&mi, na 
yidam sukeram agåram sjjhåvasetå ekantaparipunpam ekan- 
taparisuddham sankhalikhitam brahmacariyam caritum. yam 
nün&ham kesamassum oháretvà kåsåyåni vattbåui acchådetvå 
agårasmå anagáriyam pabbejeyyan tL atha kho tani asiti 
gAmikasahaseini bhegavato bhüsitam ebhinanditvå anumo- 
ditvå uttháy&saná bhagavantam abhivådetvå padakkhinam 
katvå pakkamimsu. |111 atha kho Sono Koliviso acirapa- 
kkantesu tesu asitiy& gamikasahassesu yena bhagavå ten’ 
upesamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abbivådetvå ekam- 
antam niefdi. eksmantam nisinno kho Sono Koliviso bha- 
gavantam etad evoca: ysthü-yatháham bhante bhagavatà 
dhammam desitam . . . brahmacariyam caritum.  iochám' 
aham bhante kesamessum ohåretvå kåsåyåni vattbåni acchá- 
detvå egårasmå snagåriyam pabbajitum, pebbájetu mam 
bhante bhagava 'ti alattha kho Sono Koliviso bhagavato 
вап ге pabbajjam, alattha upasampadam.  acirüpasampanno 


182 MAHÅVAGGA. [V.1.12-16. 


ca pan&yasmá Sono Sitavane viharati. |121 tases accára- 
ddbaviriyasss cankamato pådå bhijjimsu, cankamo lohitena 
phuto hoti seyyathåpi gavüghátanam. atha kho &yasmato 
Sonassa rahogatassa patisallinassa evam cetaso parivitakko 
udapådi: ye kho keci bhagavato såvakå åraddhaviriyå viha- 
ranti, aham tesam aiifiataro, aths ca pana me nånupådåya 
åaavehi cittam vimuccati, samvijjanti kho pana me kule bho- 
gå. sakkå bhoge ca bhuñjitum puññáni ca kAtup. yam 
nün&ham hinfydvattitva bhoge ca bhufijeyyam puññáni ca 
kareyyan ti j13|| atha kho bhagevá åyasmato Sonassa oe- 
taså cetoparivitakkam afiflåya seyyathåpi ода balavá puriso 
sammifijitam vå báham pasåreyye pssåritam vå b&ham 
eammifijeyya, evam eva Gijjhaküte pabbate antarahito Sita- 
vane påturahoai. atha kho bhagava sambebulehi bhikkhdhi 
saddhim sen&sanacárikam ahindanto yen&yasmato Sonassa 
cankamo ten’ upasamkami. addasa kho bbagavå Ayasmato 
Sonasea caiikamam lohitena phutam, disvåna bhikkhü åman- 
tesi: kassa nv åyam bhikkhave caökamo lohitena phuto 
eoyyathápi gavåghåtanan ti. &yasmato bhante Sonassa ассА- 
raddhaviriyassa cankamato pådå bhijjimsu, tassåyam canka- 
mo lohitena phuto seyyathápi gavághatanan ti. 14] atha 
kho bhagavå yenüyasmato Sonassa vihåro ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå pefifiatte Asane nisidi. &yesmápi kho Sono 
bhagavantam abhivádetv& ekamantam nisidi. ekamantam 
nisinnam kho &yasmantam Sonam bhagavå etad атоса : nanu 
te Sona rahogatasaa patisallinasaa evam cetaso parivitakko 
udapådi : ye kho keci . . . puññâni ca kareyyan ti. evam 
bhante ’ti. tam kim mafifiasi Sons, kusalo tvan pubbe agå- 
rikabhüto vinåya tantissare ‘ti evam bbante. tam kim 
mafifiasi Вора, yadá te vipàya tantiyo accåyatå honti, api nu 
te vind tasmim samaye вагата! vå hoti kammaññA và ’ti. 
no h’ etam bhante. 1151 tam kim mafifiasi бола, yadå te 
vinåya tantiyo atisithilk honti, api nu te vind tasmim samaye 
savarati vå hoti kammafifié và 'ti. no b' etam bhante. tam 
kim шаййазї Sona, yada te vinåya tantiyo n’ eve aockyatA 
honti n&tisithilá same gune pstitthitå, api nu te vipå tasmim 
eamaye saravati va hoti kammaññá vå 'ti. evam bhante. 
evam eva kho Sona aocáraddhaviriyam uddhaccAya samvatta- 


Y. 1. 16-22.) MAHÅVAGGA. . 183 


ti, atillnaviriyam kossjjåya samvattati |16] tasmåt iha 
tvam Soņa viriyasamstam sdhitthaha indriyánam са as- 
mata petivijjha tattha ca nimittam gapháhiti. evam 
bhante "ti kho &yasm& Sono bhagavato paccassosi. atha kho 
bhagavå åyasmantam Sonam imin& отёдепа ovaditvå seyya- 
арі ойша balavå puriso sammifijitam vå båham pasåreyye 
pasåritam và båham sammifijeyya, evam eva Sitavane Ayasma- 
to Sonsssa sammukhe antarahito Gijjheküte pabbate påtur- 
ahosi. (171 etha kho &yasmá Sono eparena samayens vi- 
riyasamatam adhitfhási indriyånam са samatam pativijjhi 
{айа ca nimittam aggahesi. atha kho åyssmå Sono eko 
vüpekattho appamatto åtåpi pahitatto viharanto na cirass’ 
eva yas’ attháya kulaputtå sammad eva agårasmå anagári- 
yam pabbejenti, tad anuttaram brahmacariyapariyosánam 
dittheva dhamme sayam abhiññá sacchikatvA upasampajja 
vibåsi, khina játi, vusitam brahmacariyam, katam karantyam, 
nåparam itthatt&y& 'ti abbbefifidsi, aññataro ca panåyasmå 
Sono atabatam ahosi. |181 atha kho &yasmato Sonama ara- 
hattar pattassa etad ahosi: yam nün&ham bhagavato santike 
afifiam vyåkareyyen ti. atha kho Ayasmi Sono yena bhaga- 
vå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvà bhagavantam abhivå- 
detvà ekamantam nisidi, ekamantam nisinno kho fyasmé 
Sono bhagavantam etad атоса : ||19|| yo so bhante bhikkhu 
araham khípásavo vusitavá kataksraniyo obitabháro anuppa- 
ttemadattho parikkhinabhavasamyojano sammadafifiåvimutto, 
so cha tthånåni adhimutto hoti: nekkhammådhimutto hoti, 
pevivek&dhimutto hoti, avyåpajjbådhimutto hoti, upådåna- 
kkhayådhimutto hoti, taphakkhayådhimutto hoti, asammohá- 
dhimutto hoti. |201 siy& kho pana bhante idh’ ekaccassa 
Ayesmato ovem assa: kevalam saddhdmattakam nüna ayam 
&yasmá nissåya nekkhammådhimutto 'ti. па kho pan’ etam 
bhante evam dattbabbam. khinåsavo bhante bhikkhu vusi- 
tavå katakaraniyo keraniysm attánam asamanupasaanto ka- 
tassa vå paticayam khayå rágassa vitarågattå nekkhammi- 
dhimutto hoti, khayå dosassa vitadosattå nekkhammådhi- 
шоно hoti, khayå mohassa vitamohattå nekkhammádhimutto 
hoti. J21] siy& kho pans bhante idh’ ekaccassa &yasmato 
evam assa: låbhasakkåresilokam nina ayam åyasmå nikà- 


184 MAHÁVAGGA. [V. 1. 92-27, 


mayemáno pavivekådhimutto "ti. na kho pan’ etam . . . 
khayå rágasea vitarågattå pavivekAdhimutto hoti, khayá do- 
massa vitadosattå pavivekådhimutto hoti, khayá mohassa vi- 
tamohattå pavivekådhimutto hoti. |1221  siy& kho рапа 
bhante idh’ ekaccassa üyasmato evam assa: stlabbataparå- 
másam nine ayam åyasmå eárato paccågacchanto avyåpajjhå- 
dhimutto "і. na kho pan’ etam . . . khayà rágassa vítará- 
gattà avyåpsjjhådhimutto hoti, khayå dosassa vitadomattà 
avyåpajjhådbimutto hoti, khayà mohassa vitamohatiA avyå- 
pajjhadhimutto hoti, |12311  khay& гїдама vitarágatt 
upådånakkbeyådbimutto hoti, khey& dosassa vitedosattå 
upådånakkheyådhimutto hoti, khay& mohassa vitamohattå 
upådånakkheyådbimutto hoti, khay& rågasss vitarågattå 
tanhakkhayAdhimutto hoti, khay& dosassa vitadossttå tanha- 
kkheyádhimutto hoti, khayå mobassa vitamohatté tanhakkha- 
yådhimutto hoti, khayA rågassa vitarågattå amummohádhi- 
mutto hoti, khay& dosasea vitadosattå asammohådhimutto 
hoti, khayå mohasas vitamohattå asammobådhimutto hoti. 
24 evam sammåvimuttacittassa bhante bhikkhuno bhuså 
ce pi cakkhuvififleyyå rapa cakkhussa åpåtham Agacchanti, 
n’ ev’ assa cittam pariyAdiyanti, amissikatam ov’ assa cittam 
hoti thitam Anejjappattam vayafi с’ assånupasssti. bbuså се 
pi sotavififleyyå sadd&, gbënaviññeyya gandhé, jivbAviilfleyé 
rash, kåyavififleyå photthabbå, manoviiifleyy4 dhammå ma- 
nasa Åpåtham Agacchanti, n’ ev’ assa cittam pariyádiyenti, 
amissikatam ev’ assa cittam hoti thitam ånejjappattam 
vayafi о’ asainupassati. ||25]| seyyathåpi bhante selo pabba- 
to acchiddo asusiro ekagheno puratthimåya ce pi disdya 
Agaccheyya bhuså vátavutthi, n' eva nam samkampeyya na 
sampekampeyye ns sampavedheyye, рассћітодув ce pi disåye 
— la — uttarfya ce pi disåys — la — dakkhinåya ce pi diså- 
уз... па sampevedheyye, evam eva kho bhante evam 
sammávimuttacittassa bhikkhuno bhusá ce pi cakkhuviññe- 
yyå råpå . . . manovififeyA dhammá manassa Apitbam 
&gacchanti, n’ ev’ assa oittam . . . veyafi о assånupessa- 
titi. 126 
nekkhemmam adhimuttassa pavivekafi ca cetaso 
avyåpajjhådhimutiassa up&dánakkhayassa ca | 


V. L. 97-8 2] MAHÅVAGGA. 186 


tanbakkbayådbimuttassa asammohafi ca cetaso 

disvå åyatanuppådam sammá cittam vimuccati.| 

tassa sammávimuttassa santacittassa bhikkhuno 

katasea paticayo п’ atthi karaniyafi ca na vijjati.| 

selo yathà akaghano våtena па samirati, 

evam råpå raså saddå gandhå phasså ca kevalå | 

itthå dhammå anitthå ca na pavedhenti tádino, 

thitam oittam vippamuttam vayafl c’ assánupassatiti. [|27 || 

atha kho bhagavå bhikkhü åmantesi: evam kho bhikkhave 
kulaputtå afifiam vyåkaronti. attho ca vutto attå ca anupanito. 
etha ca pan’ idh’ ekacce moghapuriså hasamånekam шаййе 
айдат vyåkaronti, te pacchA vigbåtam &pajjantiti.||28|| atha 
kho bhagavå &yssmantam Sonam åmantesi: tvam kho ‘ai 
Sona sukhumálo. anujindmi te Sopa ekepalåsikam up&hanan 
ti abam kho bhante asitisaketavåhebi rafifiam ohåya agå- 
rasmá anagáriyam pabbajito sattehatthikai ca anikam. tasaa 
me bhavissanti vattáro: Sono Koliviso asitisaketavåhehi 
гайда obáya арёгаяшА anagüriyam pabbajito sattahatthi- 
kañ ca anikam, so din’ åyam ekapelásikásu upåhanåsu satto 
"ti. 12901 васе bhagavà bhikkhusamghassa anujánieeati, 
aham pi paribhufijissimi, no ce bhegavá bhikkhusamghassa 
&nuj&nisasti, aham pi ne paribhufijissámiti. atha kho bha- 
gavå etasmim nidáne dhammikatham ketvå bhikkhü &man- 
tesi: annjånåmi bhikkhave ekapalasikam up&henam. na 
bhikkhave digunå upåhanå dháretabbá, na tigunà upåhanå 
dhåretabbå, na ganamganåpåhang dhåretabbå. yo dhåreyya, 
Apatti dukkatasså "ti. [130 1111 


tene kho pana samayena ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü sabba- 
nilika upåhenåyo dhårenti — la — sabbepitikà up&hanáyo 
dhårenti, sabbalohitiká up. dh., eabbemafijetthik& up. dh., 
eabbakanhé up. dh., eabbamahárangarattà up. dh., sabbame- 
hånåmarattå up. dhårenti. manuseà ujjbáyanti khiyanti vi- 
pácenti: seyyethåpi gih? kåmabhogino "і. bhagavato etam 
ettham ürocesum. па bhikkhave sabbantlikA upåbanå dbå- 
retabbå, na ssbbapitiká upåhanå dháretabb& . . . na sabba- 
mahånåmarattå upáhaná dbåretabbå. yo dháreyye, Apatti 
dukketassá "ti |l| tena kho pans samayena chabbaggi- 


186 MAHÅVAGGA. [V. 3.2-3. 2. 


yå bhikkhd nilakavattiká upåhanåyo db&renti, pítakavattikà 
up. dh., lohitakavattiké up. dh, mafijetthakavattikà up. dh., 
kanhavattikñ up. dh., mabárangarattevattikA up. dh., mahá- 
námarattavattikA up. dhárenti. manuså vjjbåyanti kht- 
yanti vipåcenti: seyysth&pi gihi kAmabhogino ”ti. bhaga- 
vato etam attbam årocesum. па bhikkhave nilakavattiká 
upåhanå dhüretabbà . . . na mahAnAmarattavattiké upåhanå 
dhåretabbå. yo dháreyya, Apatti dukkatassá "ti. [2] tena 
kho pans samayena chebbaggiy4 bhikkhd khallakabaddh& 
up&áhanáyo dhårenti, putabaddhå up. dbårenti, påligunthimå 
up. db., tülepupnik& up. dh., tittirapattikå up. dh., mendavi- 
sápsbandhikA up. dh., ajavis&pebandhik& up. dh., vicchikAlika 
up. dh., morapicchaparisibbité up. dh., ойга up. dhårenti. 
manusså ujjhüyanti khiyanti vip&oenti: søyyetbåpi giht kå- 
mabhogino "і. bhagavato etam attham droceaum. па bhi- 
kkhave khallakabaddhà up&haná dháretabbà . . . na citrá 
upáhaná dhåretabbå. уо dháreyya, åpatti dukkatasså "ti. [131 
tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiy& bhikkhü siha- 
cammeperikkhat& upáhanáyo dhårenti, vyagghacammaperi- 
kkhatå up. dh., dipicammap. up. dh., ajinacammap. up. dh., 
uddacammap. up. dh, majjdricammap. up. dh., kA|ska- 
cammap. up. dhb., ulükscammap. up. dhárenti. menusså 
ujjbåyanti khiyanti vipåcenti : seyyath&pi gih? kåmabhogino 
"і. bhagavato etam attbam årocesum. па bhikkhave aî- 
becammaperikkhatà ирАһапА dhåretabbå . . . na ulüka- 
саттар. up. dhåretabbå. уо dhüreyye, Apatti dukketasså 
"ti. 141211 


aths kho bhagavå pubbanhasamayam nivåsetvå pattaciva- 
rum Adaya Rájagaham pindåye påvisi afifiatarens bhikkhu- 
nå pacohåsamanena. atha kho eo bhikkhu khafijamano bha- 
gavantam pitthito-pitthito anubandhi. addasa kho aññataro 
upåsako ganamgapüp&hanam årohitvå bhagavantam dürato 
”va &geochantam, disvå upåhanå orohitvå yena bhagsvá ten’ 
upssamkami, upasamkemitvé bhagavantam abbivådetvå yena 
so bhikkhu ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvá tam bhikkhum 
abhivådetvå etad avoca: |111 kissa bhante ayyo khaffjetiti. 
pådå me Avuso pbålitå ‘tii Һарда bhante upåhanåyo "ti. 


v.8.23.1.] MAHÅVAGGA. 187 


alam åvnso patikkhittå bhegavatå ganamgandpAhand "ti 
ganhah’ età bhikkhu upåhanåyo 'ti. atha kho bhagavå 
etamnim nidáne dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü Amantesi : 
snujánámi bhikkhave omukkam ganamganfipAhanam. па 
bhikkhave nevå ganamganåpåhanå dhåretsbbå. уо: dhé- 
reyys, åpatti dukkatase "ti. |2181 


tena kho pana samayena bhagavé ejjhokåse anupå- 
hano caükamati  satthá anupáhsno cankamatiti theråpi 
bhikkhü anupáhaná cankamanti. ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü 
satthari anup&hane oafikasmamåne theresu pi bhikkhüeu 
&nup&hanesu caükemamánesu saupåhanå oafkamanti. уе 
te bhikkhü appicchá te ujjháyanti khiyanti vip&oenti: 
Каат hi name cbabbaggiyå bhikkhü satthari anupå- 
hane cankamamáne theresu pi bhikkhüsu anup&hanesu 
cankamamánesu saupåbanå cankamiesantiti. |ll| atha kho 
te bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham árocesum. saccam kira 
bhikkhave ohabbeggiyå bhikkhü eatthari . . . saupåha- 
Då cankamantiti eaccam bhagavå ’ti. vigarahi buddho 
bhagavA: katham bi nåms te bhikkhave moghapurisá sattha- 
ri... saupåhanå cankamissanti, ime hi ойша bhikkhave 
gibi odåtavasanå abhijivanikassa sippassa kåranå åcariyesu sa- 
gåravå sappatisal sabbågavottikå viharissanti. |21 idba 
kho tam bhikkhave sobhetha yam tumhe evam svåkkhåte 
dhammavinsye pebbsjitå samånå &cariyesu &cariyamattesu 
upejjbáyesu upejjbåyamattesu sagåravå sappatisså sabhága- 
vuttikå vihareyyåthe. n’ etam bhikkheve appessnnånam vá 
pasådåya — la — vigarshitvå dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü 
Amantesi: na bhikkhave åcariyesu &cariyamnttesu upajjhá- 
yesu upajjhàyamattesu anupåhanesu cankamamánesu sau- 
påhanene cankamitabbam. уо cankameyya, Apatti 
dukkstassa. па ca bhikkhave sjjbåråme up&haná dhåre- 
tabbå. yo dhåreyya, Apatti dukkatasså "ti. [131411 


tena kho pana sameyens aññatarassa bhikkhuno pådakhi- 
låbådho hoti. tam bhikkhum pariggahetvå uocåram pi 
passdvam pi nikkhámenti. addasa kho bhagavå sendsana- 
cårikam Ahindanto te bhikkhd tam bbikkhum pariggahetvå 


188 MAHÅVAGGA. (У. 8. 1-6. 4. 


uccåram pi paasávam pi nikkhåmente, disvåns yena te bhi- 
kkhf ten’ upasamkemi, upasamkamitvà te bhikkhü etad 
avoca: |11 kim imassa bhikkhave bhikkhuno åbådho ‘ti 
imaess bhante 4yasmato pådakhilåbådho, imam mayam pa- 
riggabetvå uocåram pi passåvam pi nikkhámemá 'ti. atha 
kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü 
&mentesi: anujånåmi bhikkhave yassa pådå và dukkbå pådå 
và pbålitå pådakbilå vá áb&dho upåhanam dhåretun ti. 
121511 


tena kho pana samayens bhikkht adhotehi pådehi maficam 
рі pitham pi abbirühenti, civaram pi sendsanam pi dussati. 
bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujdndmi bhikkhave 
idAni maficam vA pitham và abhirühissámii upåhansm 
dháretun ti. |1|| tens kho pans samayena bhikkhd rattiyå 
upoaathaggam pi sannisajjam pi gaochantA andbakåre kha- 
num рі kantakam pi akkamanti, pádá dukkh& honti. bha- 
gaveto etam attham drocesum. euujånåmi bhikkhave ajjbá- 
ráme upáhanam dháretur ukkam pedipam kattaradandan ti. 
121 tena kho pana samayens chabbaggiyå bhikkhà 
rattiyå pacoüsssamayam paccutth&ys katthapådukåyo abhi- 
rühitvà ajjhokAse cankamsnti uccásaddà mahésaddå khata- 
khetasaddå anekavibitam tirsochånakstham kathenté seyyath’ 
idam : råjaketham, corakatham, mabåmattak., senåk., bha- 
yak., yuddbek., annak., pånak., vatthak., sayanak., målåk., 
gandhak., fidtik., yånak., gåmak., nigamak., nagarak., jana- 
padak., itthik., sürak., visikhak., kumbbatthånak., pubbape- 
tak., náuettbak., lokakkhåyikam samuddakkbåyikam itibhe- 
vAbhavakatham iti và kitakam pi akkamitv& mårenti bhikkhü 
pi samådbimhå cAventi ||| ye te bhikkhü appiochå te 
ujjbåyanti khtyanti vip&centi : katham hi n&ma ohabbaggiyå 
bhikkhû rettiyå pacoisasamayam paocutthåya katthapådukå- 
yo sbhirühitvá ajjhokåse cafikamisssnti uocåssddå . . . akka- 
mitvå maressanti bhikkh pi samådbimhå cávessantiti. atha 
kho te bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham frocesum. saccam 
kira bhikkhave ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü rattiy& paocüsssam- 
eyam pacouttháye katthapAdukéyo asbhirfhitvA sjjbokåse 
caükamanti uoo&saddá . . . akkamitvå márenti bhikkhå pi 


Y. @. 4-8. 1.] MAHÅVAGGA. 189 


samådhimhå cáventiti. васса bhagavá. vigarshitvé dha- 
mmikatham katvå bhikkhü &mantesi: па bhikkhave ka- 
tthapáduk& dbåretsbbå. уо dbåreyye, Apatti dukketasså 
"ti. 4161 


atha kho bhagevà Råjagabe yatbåbbirantam vikaritvå 
yena Bårånasi tena cårikam pakkåmi. anupubbena cåri- 
kam caramåno yena Bårånasi tad avasari. tatra sadam bha- 
gavå Bårånasiyam vibarati Isipatane migadåye. tena 
kho pana вашауепа chabbaggiyå bhikkhü bbagavatå 
katthapådukå patikkhittà "ti tAlatarune chedApetva tålapetta- 
pådukåyo dbårenti, táni tálatarapáni cbinnåni milåyanti. 
manusså ujjbåyanti khiyanti vipåcenti: каат hi nama sa- 
mand Sakyaputtiyé tAlatarupe chedápetvá tålapattapådukåyo 
dhåressanti, tani t&latarupáni chinnáni milåyanti. ekindri- 
yam samanå Sakyaputtiyå jivam vihethentiti. |111 aseosum 
kho bhikkbü tesam manussinam ujjhåyantånam kbiyantå- 
nam vipåcentånam. atha kho te bhikkhü bhagavato etam 
attham Arocesum. sasoca kira bhikkhave ohabbeggiyå bhi- 
kkhå t&latarune chedåpetvå tålapettapådukåyo dbårenti, tani 
tålstaranåni chinnåni milåyentiti sacoam bhagavá. viga- 
rabi buddho bbagevå: katham bi ойша te bhikkhave mogha- 
puriså tålatarune chedåpetvå tAlapattap&duküyo dbåressanti, 
(ani tilatarandni chinnáni milåyanti. jivasafifino hi bhi- 
kkhave manussÁ rukkhasmim. n’ etam bhikkhave appa- 
sannånam vå pasådåya — Іа — vigarahitvé dhammikatham 
katvå bhikkhü &mantesi: na bhikkhave tålepattapådukå 
dbáretabbá. уо dbåreyya, Apatti dukkatasså ”ti. [121] tena 
kho pana samayena chgbbaggiy& bhikkbü bhagavatá tå- 
lapattapáduká patikkhitt 'ti velutarupe ohedåpetvå veļu- 
pattapådukåyo dhårenti, tani... (= 81. 2. Read ve]? 
instead of tåla”) . . . na bhikkhave vejupattapådukå dhåre- 
tabbå. уо dhåreyys, Apatti dokkatassA "ti. ||3177 II 


atha kho bhagavå BérAnasiyam yathåbhirantam viha- 
ritvå yena Bhaddiyam tens cárikam pakkåmi. anupubbe- 
na cårikam caramåno yena Bhaddiyam tad avesari tatra 
вадат bhegavå Bhaddiye viherati Jåtiyåvane. tena 


190 MAHÅVAGGA. [V. & 1-9. 1. 


kho pans esmayena Bhaddiy& bhikkhå anekavihitam pådu- 
kam mandanånuyogasm anuyuttå viberanti, tinspádukam ka- 
` ronti pi kår&penti pi, mufijapåd. k. рі k. pi, babbsjopåd. 
k. pi k. pi, hintálapüd. k. рі k. pi, kamalapád. k. pi k. pi, 
kambalapåd. k. pi k. pi, rificanti uddesam paripoccham 
edhistlam sdhicittam adbipafifiam. |1] ye te bhikkhü appi- 
ochñ, te ujjbåyanti kbiyanti vipåcenti: katham hi nåma 
Bhaddiyà bhikkhü anekavihitam pådukam mandan&nuyogam 
anuyuttå viharissanti, tinaphdukam karissanti pi kåråpesmnti 
рі . . . müciseanti uddesam peripuocham adhisilam adhi- 
cittam adbipafillan ti. stha kho te bhikkhü bhagavate etam 
вет årocesum. saccam kira bhikkhave Bhaddiy& bhikkhi 
anekavihitam pådukam mandsuånuyogam enuyuttå viha- 
ranti, tipapådukam keronti pi kåråpenti pi — la — rificanti 
uddesam . . . adhipafifian ti. saccam bbagavå.  vigarahi 
buddho bhagavé: Каат hi n&ma te bhikkhave moghapu- 
riså anekavihitam pådukam mandanánuyogam anuyuttå vi- 
hariseanti, tinapádukam karissanti pi kåråpessanti pi — la — 
rificissanti uddesam paripuocham adhisilam adhicittam adhi- 
раййат. п’ etam bhikkhave appasannánam vå pasådåys. || 2 || 
vigarahitvà dhammiketham katvå bbikkbå Amantesi: na 
bhikkhave tinapáduk& dbåretabbå, na muiljapådukå dháre- 
tabbå, na babbajep. dhb., na hintålep. dh., па kamalap. dh., 
na kambelap. dh., па sovannamayå p. dh., na rüpiyamay& p. 
dh., na mapimayá p. dh., na veluriyamayá р. dh., na phali- 
kamayå p. dh., па kamsamayá p. dh., па kácamayá p. dh., na 
tipumay& p. dh., па sfeameyå p. dh., na tambelohamayá p. 
dháretabbá. yo dhåreyya, åpatti dukkatassa. па ca bhi- 
kkhave kaci eamkamantya pådukå dhåretabbå. yo dhåreyya, 
Apatti dukkatasss. anujånåmi bhikkhave tisso püdukAyo 
dhuvatthåniyå asamkameniyåyo, vaocapádukam, passåvapå- 
dukam, Acamanapadukan ti. 113118]! 


atha kho bbagavå Bhaddiye yathábhirentam viharitvå 
yena SAvatthi tena cårikam pakkAmi. anupubbens сАп- 
kam caramåno yena Sávatthi tad avasari. tatra вадат bha- 
gavå Såvatthiyam viharati Jetavene Andthepindi- 
kassa åråme. tena kho pana samayens chabbaggiya 


V. 9. 1-10. 3.] MAHÁVAGGA. 191 


bhikkhü Aciravstiyå nediyå gávinam taranttnam visånesu pi 
genhanti, kannesu pi ganbanti, givüya pi ganbanti, cheppå- 
ya pi ganhanti, pitthim pi abhirühanti, rattacittápi afigajå- 
tam chupanti, vacchatari pi ogåhetvå mårenti. ||1|| manus 
ujjbåyanti khíyanti vip&centi: Каат hi nåme samapá 
Bekyaputtiy& gåvinam tarantinam visånesu pi gahessanti 
— gha — soyyathåpi giht kámabhogino ‘tii assosum kho 
bhikkhü tesam manuseånam ujjháyantánam khiyantAnam vi- 
påcentånam. atha kho te bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham 
årocesum. eaccam kira bhikkhave — la — saooam bhagavå. 
121 vigarahitv’ dhammikethem katvå bbikkhå åmantesi: 
na bhikkhave gåvinam visánesu gahetabbam, na kannesu ga- 
hetabbam, па givåys gahetabbam, na cheppåya gahetsbbam, 
па pittbt ebhirthitabbå. yo abhirüheyya, åpatti dukkatassa. 
na са bhikkhave rattacittena angajátam chupitabbam. уо 
chupeyya, âpatti thullaccayassa. na vaoohatari máretabbá. 
yo máreyye, yathådhammo kåretabbo ’ti. [|8 tena kho 
pave samayena ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü yånena yayanti, 
itthiyuttena pi purisantarena, purisayuttena pi itthantarena. 
manusså ujjháyanti khiyanti vipücenti : seyystbåpi Gaögå- 
mahiyåyå 'ti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. na bhi- 
kkhave уёпепа yåyitabbam. yo удуеууа, åpatti dukkatasså 
"і. 14091 


tena kho pana samayena aüfiataro bhikkha Kosalesu 
janapadesu SAvatthim gacohanto bhagavantam dassandya 
antará шарре gilåno hoti atha kho so bhikkhu maggå 
okkamma efifistarasmim rukkhamile nisidi manumå tam 
bhikkhum disvå etad avooum : kaham ayyo bhante gamissa- 
titi. Bávatthim kho aham Avuso gamissåmi bhagavantam 
dassanåyå ’ti. 111 ehi bhante gamissåmå ’ti. n&áham åvuso 
eakkormi, gildno’mhiti. ehi bhante yånam abhirdhå "ti. alam 
åvuso patikkhittam bhagevetå yánan ti kukkucofyanto yå- 
nam nábhirühi etha kho so bhikkhu SAvatthim gantvå 
bhikkhünam etam attham Arocesi. bhikkhú bhagavato etam 
attham årocesum. sanujånåmi bhikkhave gilânassa yànan ti. 
121 atha kho bhikkhünam etad ahosi: itthiyuttam nu kho 
purisayattam nu kho "і. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 


192 MAHÅVAGGA. (У. 10. 3-7. 


anujånåmi bhikkhave purisayuttam bastthevatteken ti. tena 
kho pane samsyens afifiatarassa bhikkhuno yånugghåtena 
bå]hataram aphüsu ahosi. bhagavato etam attham Arocesum. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave sivikam pátankin ti. |31 tena kho 
рапа samayena obabbaggiyå bhikkht uccÁsnyanamabásaya- 
nåni dhårenti seyyath’ idam: &sandim, pallankam, gonakam, 
cittakam, patikam, patalikam, tülikam, vikatikam, uddhalo- 
tnim, ekantalomim, katthissam, koseyyam, kuttakam, battba- 
«агат, assattheram, rathattheram, sjinappavenim, kadali- 
migapavarapaccattharanam, sauttaracchadam, ubhatolohita- 
küpadhánam. menusså vibåracårikam åhindantå passitva 
ujjbåyanti khiyanti vip&centi : seyyathåpi giht kåmabhogiro 
‘ti, bhagavato etam attham årocesum. ||4]| па bhikkhave 
uocåssyanamahåseyanåni dbåretabbåni seyyath' (dam: 
dsandi, pallanko, gonako, cittakå, реба, patalik&, tüliká, vi- 
katik&, uddhalomi, ekentalomi, katthissam, kvseyyam, ku- 
ttakam, hatthattharam, assattharam, rathattharam, aji- 
nappaveni, kadalimigapavarapaccattharanam, sauttaraccha- 
dam, ubhatolohitaküpadh&uam. yo dhåreyya, åpatti dukka- 
tasså "ti. 151 tena kho pana «amayena chabbaggiyå 
bhikkhü bbagavatå uccAsayanamehåsayanåni patikkhitténtta 
mahécammåni dhårenti, sihacemmam, vysggbecammam, dt- 
picammam. tåni maflcappamånens pi chinnåni honti, рї- 
thappamánena pi chinnåni honti, anto pi maflce pafiflattAni 
honti, bahi pi mafice pefiflattåni honti, anto pi pithe pañña- 
ttáni honti, bahi pi pithe pafifiattåni honti manusså vihá- 
racårikam åbindantå passitvå ujjb&yenti khiyanti vipåcenti : 
seyyathåpi gihi kåmabhogino "і. bhagavato etam attham 
&rocesum. па bhikkhave mahåcammåni dbháretabbáni, st- 
'hacammam, vyagghacammam, dipicammam. yo dháreyya, 
&petti dukkatasså "ti [[6]| tena kho pana eamayena cha- 
bbaggiyå bhikkbü bhagavatá mehåcammåni patikkhittA- 
níti gocammáni dhárenti. tåni maficappemápens pi chinnå- 
ni honti . . . bahi pi pithe pafiüettàni honti. аййа!аго 
påpabbikkhu aüfiatarassa påpupåsskassa kulüpako hoti. atha 
kho so pápabhikkhu pubbenhasamayam nivåsetvå pattaciva- 
ram ádáya yena tassa papupásakassa nivesanam ten’ upa- 
samkami, upesamkamitvå paññatte ёзапе nisidi. atha kho 


V. 10. 1-10.] MAHÅVAGGA. 193 


so påpupåsako уепа so pápabhikkhu ten’ upasamkami, upa- 
samkamitvå tam påpebbikkhum abhivddetva ekamantam 
nisidi. ||7|| tena kho pane samayena tassa papupüsakassa 
vacchako hoti tarunako abhirüpo dassaniyo pásádiko citro 
seyyathåpi dipicchåpo. atha kho so pApabhikkha tam va- 
cohakam sakkeocam upepijjháysti. atha kho so påpupåsako 
tam påpabbikkhum etad avoca: kissa bhante ayyo imam va- 
cobakam sakkaccam upenijjbåyatiti. attho me Avuso imassa 
vacchakassa cammenå 'ti. atha kho so påpupåsako tam 
vacchakam vadbitvå cammam vidbånitvå tassa påpabhi- 
kkhuno pádási etha kho so p&ápebhikkhu tam cammam 
samghåtiyå peticchádetvà agamåsi. |8] atha kho så gåvi 
v&cchagiddhini tam påpebbikkbum pitthito-pitthito anu- 
bandbi. bhikkhü evam åhamsu: kissa ty åyam åvuso gåvi 
pitthito-pitthito anubaddbå "ti. aham pi kho åvuso па jånå- 
mi kena my Ayam gavi pitthito-pitthito anubaddha "ti. tens 
kho pana samayena tassa påpebbikkhuno samgbáti lohitena 
makkhita hoti. bhikkhü evam âhamsu : ayam pane te avuso 
aamgbåti kim katA ti, atha kho so påpabbikkbu bhikkha- 
nam etam attbam árocesi. kim рапа tvam &vuso pånåtipåte 
samádupeeiti, evam &vuso 'ti. ye te bhikkbå appiochá, te 
ujjbåyanti khiyanti vip&centi: каар hi náma bbikkhu 
pånåtipåte samådapessati. папи bhagavatà anekapariyåyens 
pånåtipåto garahito pånåtipåtå veramant pasatthå "ti. atha 
kho te bhikkhå bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. ||9| atha 
kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne etasmim pakarane bhikkhu- 
samgham eannipåtåpetvå tam påpabbikkhum patipucchi : 
eaccam kira tvam bhikkhu pånåtipåte samådepestti. saccam 
bhagavå. katha bi nåma tvam moghapurisa påņåtipåte 
samAdapeseasi. nena mayá moghapurisa snekapariyåye- 
na pånåtipåto garahito, påpåtipåtå veramani pasatthå. n’ 
etam moghapurisa eppasannánam và pasådåye. vigara- 
hitvå dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü Amantesi: па bhi- 
kkhave pånåtipåte samAdapetabbam. уо samádapeyya, ya- 
tbådbammo káretabbo. па bhikkhave gocammam dhåre- 
tabbam. уо dhåreyys, Apatti dukkatassa. na ca bhikkhave 
kifici сат тет dhåretabbarn. уо dháreyye, Apatti dukka- 
taseà "ti. 1101101 


voL. пі. 13 


194 MAHÅVAGGA. [V.11.1-18. 2. 


tena kho pana samayens manussånam maficam pi pitham 
рі cammonaddhåni honti cammavineddhåui. bbikkhå ku- 
kkuccáyantá nübhinisldanti. bhegavato etam attham froce- 
sum. anujånåmi bbikkheve gihivikatam abbinisiditum, na 
tv eva abbinipajjitun ti. tens kho pana samayena vihårå 
cammabendbehi ogumphiyanti. bhikkhå kukkuccáyantá nå- 
bhinisidanti. bhagavato etam attham &rooesum. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave bandhanamattam abhinisiditun ti. ||1y11U 


tena kho pana samayena ohabbaggiyá bhikkhü saupå- 
hand gåmam pevisanti. manusså ujjháyanti khiyanti vipá- 
centi: seyyathåpi gihi kåmabhogino 'ti. bhagavato etam 
attham årocesum. na bhikkhave saupáhanena gåmo pavisi- 
tabbo. yo paviseyye, Apatti dukkatasså tii tena kho pana 
samayena аййа(аго bhikkhu gilåno hoti, na sakkoti upåhane- 
na vind gåmam pavisitum. bhagavato etam attham åroce- 
sum. eansjånåmi bhikkhave gilánena bhikkhunå saupåha- 
nene gåmam pavisitan ti. |1112 


tena kho pana samayena fyasmA Mah&kaco&no Avanti- 
ви viherati Kurareghare Papåte pabbate. tena kho рапа 
samayena Bono upåssko Kutikanno àyusmato Mebåkaocå- 
nassa upattháko hoti. atha kho Sono upåssko Kutikanno 
yenåyasmå МаһАКассАпо ten’ upasamkami, upasamksmitvå 
Ayasmantam Mahákaccánam abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi. 
ekamantam nisinno kho Sono upåsako Kutikanno åyasmantam 
Mah&kaooånam etad avoca: yathá-yatháham bhante ayyens 
Mahákaccánena dhammam desitam åjånåmi, na yidam su- 
karam agáram sjjbåvasatå ekantaparipunpam ekantapari- 
suddham saükhalikhitam brahmacariyam caritum. icohåm” 
sham bhante kesamassum obåretvå kåsåyåni vetthåni accbá- 
detvå agårasmå ansgåriyam pebbejitum, pabbåjetu mam 
bhante ayyo Mahåkaccåno ’ti. [1] dukkaram kho Sona yå- 
vajivam ekaseyyam ekabhattam brabmacariyam, ingha tvam 
Bona tatth’ eva ag&rikebhüto buddh4nam såsanam anuyufija 
kálayuttam ekaseyyam ekabhattam brahmacariyan ti. atha 
kho Sonassa upásakassa Kutikepnassa yo ahosi pabbajjåbhi- 
samkháro so patippassambhi. dutiyam pi kho Sono upåsako 


Y. 18, 2-6] MAHÅVAGGA. 195 


Kutikanno — la — tatiyam pi kho Sono up. Kut. yenüyasmá 
Mahåkaocåno ten” upesamkami . . . pabbåjetu mam bhante 
ayyo Mab&kaocåno "Н. atha kho áyasmà Mahfkaccáno 
Bonam upésakam Kutikanpam pebbåjesi. tena kho pena 
samayena Avsntidakkhinåpatho appebhikkhuko hoti. atha 
kho Ayasmé Mahåksocåno tippam vassánam accayena kicche- 
na kasirena tato-tato dasavaggam bhikkhusamgham ваппірё- 
thpetva åyasmantam Sonam upasaempádesi. ||2|| atha kho 
Ayasmato Sonassa vassam vutthassa rahogatassa patisallinassa 
evam cetaso parivatakko udapådi: suto yeva kho me so bha- 
gavå ediso ca ediso cå "ti na ca maya sammukhå dittho. ga- 
ccheyy&ham tam bhagavantam dassanåya arahantam sammå- 
sambuddham saoe mam upajjháyo anujåneyyå 'ti. eatha kho 
Ayasmå Bono sdyanhasamayam patisallànà vutthito yená- 
yasmå Mahákaccáno ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå ayas- 
mantam Mahékaccinam abbivådetvå ekamantam nisidi, ekam- 
antam nisinno kho Ayasmå Sono åyasmantam Mahåkaccå- 
nam etad avoes > |j8l| idha mayham bhante rahogatassa 
patisallinasas evam cetaso parivitakko udapádi: suto yeva 
kho me so bhagavå ediso ca ediso cA ”ti, na oa mayá sammu- 
khá dittho.  gaccheyyáham tam bhegavantam dassanåya 
srahantam sammásambuddham васе mam upajjháyo enujáne- 
ууё 5i gacoheyyåham bhante tam bhagavantam dassanåya 
arahantam sammásambuddham aaoo mam upsjjhåyo anujáná- 
titi, sadho sidho Sona, gaccha tvam Вора tam bhagavantam 
damsanåya arahantam sammásambuddham. |4|| dakkhissasi 
tvam Sons tam bhagevantam påsådikam pesádaniyam santin- 
` driyam santamånesam uttamadamathasamatham anuppattam 
dantam guttam ystindriyam någam. tena hi tvam Sona 
mama vacaneus bhagavato pide siraså vanda upajjháyo me 
bhante dyasm4 MahAkaccino bhagavato páde siraså vandati- 
ti, өтай ca vadehi: Avantidekkbinåpatbo bhante appa- 
bhikkhuko, tinnam me vassånam socayena kiochena kesirena 
tato-tato dasavaggam bhikkhusamghem sannipåtåpetvå upa- 
sampadam alattham. арр eva ойша bbagavå Áventidakkhi- 
nåpathe appatarena ganens upasampadam anujåneyya. |1611 
Avantidakkhin&pathe bhante kanhuttarå bhümi kbarå go- 
kantakabatå. арр eva nims bhegevà Avantidakkhinåpe- 


196 MAHÅVAGGA. [V. 13. 6-9. 


the ganamganfipAhanam anujåneyya. Avantidakkhinipathe 
bhante nabånagarukå manusså udakasuddhikå. app eva nå- 
ma bhagavå Avantidakkhindpathe dhuvanahánam anujå- 
neyys. Avaentidakkhinápathe bhante cammåni attharanåni 
elakacammam ajacammam migacammam. seyyathápi bhante 
majjhimesu janapadesu eragu moragu majjháru jantu, evam 
eva kho bhante Avantidakkhinåpathe cammáni attharanåni 
elakacammam ajacammam migacammam. арр eva nàma 
bhagavå Aventidakkbip&psthe cammáni attharenåni anujå- 
neyya elakacammam ajacammam migacammam. ([6]] etarahi 
bhante manusså nissimagatánam bhikkhünam civaram denti 
imam civaram itthannámassa demå "ti, te ågantvå Arocenti 
itthannåmebi te Avuso manussehi civaram dinnan ti, te ku- 
kkuccáyantá na sådiyenti må no nissaggiyam shositi. app 
eva nåma bhagavå civare pariyáyam Acikkheyyé ”ti. evam 
bhante 'ti kho åyasmå Sono åyasmato Mah&ükaccánassa pati- 
sunitvå uttbåyåsanå åyasmautam Mabåksccånam abbivadetva 
padakkhinam katvå senfisanam samsåmetvå pattactvaram 
&dáya yene Savatthi tena pakkåmi. |7] anapubbena yenə 
Såvatthi Jetavanam An&thapindikaesa Åråmo yena 
bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam 
abhivadetva ekamsptam nisidi. ва kho bhagavá &yssman- 

tam Anandam Amantesi: imassdnanda &gantukassa bhi- 
kkhuno senåsanam paüilápehiti atha kho Ayasma Anando 
yassa kho mam bhagavå &nápeti imassa Ananda Agantukessa 
bbikkhuno senåsanam pafifiåpehiti, iochati bhagavå tena bhi- 
kkhuvå eaddhim ekevihåre vatthum, icchati bbagavå &yus- 
matå Sonena saddbim ekevihüre vatthun ti yasmim vihåre 
bhagavå vibarati tasmim vihåre åyasmato Sonasas senåsanam 
pafiilåpesi. ||B|| аа kho bhagavå bahud eva rettim ajjho- 
kåse vitinåmetvå vibáram pavisi. &yasmápi kho Sono bahud 
eva rattim ajjhokáse vitindmetva vihåram pAvisi. athe kho 
bhagavå rettiyá paccüsasamayam paccutthåya áyasmantam 
Bonam ajjhesi: patibhátu tam bhikkhu dhammo bhåsitun 
ti. evam bhante 'ti kho Ayasmå Sono bhagavato patisunitvå 
sabbán' eva etthakavaggikåni sarene abhási. atha kho bha- 
gavå åyasmato Bopases sarabhafifiapariyoeine abbhanumodi : 
sádhu sádhu bhikkhu suggahitáni kho te bhikkhu atthaka- 


V. 18. 9-13.] MAHÅVAGGA. 197 


vaggikåni sumanasikatåni süpadháritáni kalydniyapi 'si vå- 
chya samannågato vissattbåya anejagelåya atthassa vififldpa- 
niy&. kativasso si tvam bhikkhü ’ti. ekavasso aham bbagavå 
"tL 191 kissa pana tvam bhikkhu evam ciram akåstti. ci- 
ram dittho me bhante kåmesu ådinavo, api ca sambådbå gha- 
råvåså bahukiccá bahukaraniyå 'ti. atha kho bhagavå etam 
attham viditvA tåyam veláyam imam udånam udånesi : 


disvå Adinavam loke fiatvå dhammam nirüpadhi 
вгіуо па ramati pape såsane ramati suciti. [| 10 [| 


atha kho åyasmå Sono patisammodati kho mam bhegavå, 
ayam khv assa kalo yam me upejjháyo paridassiti utthåyåsa- ` 
nå ekamsam uttarüsangam karitvå bhagavato pådesu siraså 
nipatitvå bhagavantam etad avoca: upajjháyo me bhante 
åyasmå Mahákaccáno bhagavato раде siraså vandati evañ 
са vadati: Avantidakkhinåpatho . . . pariydyam åcikkbeyyå 
ti. atha kho bhagavå etasmim nidáne etasmim pakarane 
dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü åmentesi: Avantidakkhi- 
påpatho bhikkhave appabbikkbuko. anujånåmi bhikkhave 
sabbapaccantimesu janapadesu vinayadharapaiicame- 
Da gapena upasampadam. |111 tatr? ime paccantimå 
janapsdå: pursttbimåya disåya Kajangalam náma ni- 
gamo, tassa parena Mahåsålå, tato parå paocantimå ja- 
napadå, orato majjhe. puratthimadakkhinfya dis&ya Salla- 
vati nama пайї, tato parå paccantimå janapadá, orato 
majjhe. dakkhindya disáye Setakannikam ойша nigamo, 
tato par paocantimå janapadå, orato majjhe. pacohimåya 
dishya Thünam паша bråhmanegåmo, tato pará paccanti- 
må jenspadá, orato majjhe. uttaråya dishya Usiraddhajo 
пашта pabbato, tato parå paccantimå janapad&, orato majjhe. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave evarüpesu paccantimesu jenspadesu 
vinayadherapeficamens ganena upasampedam. |] 12|| Avanti- 
dakkhipåpethe bhikkhave kanhuttarå bhümi kharå gokanta- 
kahat& anvjånåmi bhikkhave sabbapeccantimesu janapade- 
su ganamganåpåhenam. Avantidekkhinfipathe bhikkhave 
nehánagaruká manusså udakasuddhiké, anujün&mi bhikkha- 
ve sabbspaccantimesu janapadesu dhuvanahünam. Avanti- 
ESKER RE EEE EES 


198 MAHÁVAGGA. (V. 18. 13. 


ajacammam migscammam. seyyathåpi bhikkhave majjhi- 
mesu janapadesu eragu moragu majjháru jantu, evam eva 
kho bhikkhave Avantidskkhinf&pathe oammåni attharenåni 
elakacammam ajacammam migacammam. anujånåmi bhi- 
kkhave sabbapaccantimesu janapadesu cammåni attharanáni 
elakacammem ajacammam migacammam. idha pana bhi- 
kkhave manusså nissimasgatánam bhikkhünam civaram denti 
imam civaram itthannåmasss demå ”ti. anujdnémi bhi- 
kkhave såditum. па táva tam gananipagam yåva na ha- 
ttham gacchatiti. 111811811 
oammakkhandhakam pefioamam. 


imamhi khandhake vatthu tesatthi. tase’ uddánam : 
råjå Magadho Sono ca asttisahassissaro 

Sagato Gijjhakütasmim bahum dassesi uttarim | 
pebbajjáreddha-bhijjimsu viņam ekapalAsikam, 
10114, pita, lohitikA, mafijetth4, kanham eva ca,| 
mabårafiga-mahånåmå vattiká ca patikkhipi, 
khallaká, puta-påli ca, tåla-tittira-mend'-ajå,| 
vicchikå mora-citrá ca, stha-vyaggh4 ca, dipikå, 
ajin’-udda, majjart ca, kaja-lavaparikkhatA,| 
phålit-upåhanå, khilé, 'dhota-khánu-khatakhatá, 
tala-velu-tinam 0” eva, muflja-babbeja-hintalk,| 
kamala-kambala-sovannå, тїрїїгА, mani, vejuriyå, 
phalika, kamsa-kåcå ca, tipu-sisañ ca, tambakt,| 
gåvi, yånam, gilåno ca, purisayutta-sivikA, 
sayanåni, mahácammá, gocammehi ca påpako,| 
gihinam, cammabaddhehi, pavisanti, gilåyano, 
Mabåkaoccåyano Sono saren’ atthakavaggikam | 
upasampadam paficaganam ganamgenå dhuvasiná 
cammattharanånufifiåsi na tåva gananüpsgam 
adds’ ime vare pafica Sonattherassa nåyako ’ti. 


a 


199 


` MAHÁVAGGA. 


VI. 


Tena samayena buddho bhagavå Sávatthiyam viharati 
Jetavane Ånåthapindikassa Aråme. tena kho pana sam- 
ayena bhikkhünam såradikens åbådhena phutthånam yågu 
pi pitå uggaochati bhattam pi bhuttam uggacchati, te tena 
kiså honti làkh& dubbannå uppanduppandukejåtå dhammani- 
santhatagattå. addasa kho bbagavå te bbikkbå kise lükhe 
dubbenne vuppanduppanduksjåte  dhammanisenthatagatte, 
disvàna &áyasmantam Ánandam Amantesi: kim nu kho 
Ananda otarshi bbikkbO kisà lükh& . . . dhamanisanthata- 
gattA ’ti. etarahi bhante bhikkhfinam sáradikena &bádhena 
phuttbånam yågu рі pitå uggacchati bhattam pi bhuttam 
uggacohati, te tena kiså lükhà dubbanné uppanduppanduka- 
jåtå dhamanisanthatagattà "ti. ||1]| atha kho bhagavato ra- 
hogatassa petisallinasss evam cetaso perivitakko udspådi: 
etarahi kho bhikkhünam sfradikeva åAbådhens phutthånam 
— la — dhamanisenthatagattå. kim nu kho aham bhikkhá- 
nam bhessjjam anujåneyyam, yam bhessjjafi c’ eva assa bhe- 
sajjasammatañ ca lokasea &hárattafi ca phareyys na са olariko 
&háro paññáyeyyá 'ti. atha kho bhagavato etad ahosi: 
imåni kho райса bhessjjåni eeyyath' idam sappi navanitam 
telam madhu phápitam bhessjjåni o' eva bhesajjasammatani 
ca lokassa &hürsttail ca pharanti па ca olåriko &háro paññá- 
yati. yam nånåham bhikkhünam imåni райса Ъћевајјёоі 
anujáneyyam kále patiggahetvå kale paribhufijitun ti. |1211 
atha kho bhegavà sàysnhasamayam patisallinA vutthito 
etasmim nidáne dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü åmantesi: 
idha mayham bhikkhave rahogatassa . . . раййдуеууё "ti. 
tassa mayham bhikkhave etad ahosi: imåni kho pafica bhe- 


200 MAHÅVAGGA. (VI. 1. 3-8. 1. 


sajjini — 1а — yam nåpåham bhikkhinam imåni райса 
bhesajjáni anujáneyyam kåle patiggahetv& kale paribhuiiji- 
tun ti. anujånåmi bhikkhave tåni рейса bhesajjáni kale 
patiggabetvå kåle peribhuffjitun ti. ||3/| tena kho pans sam- 
ayena bhikkhü tåni pafica bhessjjåni kâle patiggahetvå 
kale paribhufjanti. tesem y&ni pi tani påkatikåni lûkhåni 
bhojanåni táni pi na cchådenti, pag eva senesikåni. te tena 
c’ eva såradikena &ábádhena phutthå iminå са bhattåochanda- 
kena tadubhayena bbiyyosomattåya kiså honti lükbà du- 
bbannå uppanduppanduksjåtå dhemanisenthatagattå. айдала 
kho bhagava te bhikkhi bhiyyosomattåya — la — dhama- 
nisanthatagatte, disvána Ayasmantam Anandam Amantesi : 
kim nu kho Ananda etarabi bhikkhü bbiyyosomettåya 
kis — la — dhamsnisanthatagatta ‘ti. [4] etarahi bhante 
bhikkhü tåni ca pafica bhessjjåni kâle . . . tadubhayena 
bhiyyosomattåya kiså lûkhå dubbannå uppapduppenduksjåtå 
dhemauisanthatagetté ”ti. atha kho bhagava etasmim nidåne 
dhammikatham ketvå bhikkhü &mantesi: anajânâmi bhi- 
kkhave Апі райса bheeajjáni patiggahetvá kale pi vikåle pi 
peribhufljitun ti. SL 


tena kho pana samayens gilånånam bhikkhünam vasebi 
bhesajjebi attho hoti. bhagavato etam attham Årocesum. 
anujdndmi bhikkhave vasáni bhesajjáni acchavasam maccha- 
vasam susukåvasam sükaravasam gadrabhavasam kile pa- 
tiggahitam kåle nipakkam kåle samsattham telaparibhogena 
peribhufijitum. ||1|| vikåle ce bhikkhave patiggahitam, vi- 
kåle nipakkam, vikále samsattham, tam oe paribhufjjeyya, 
Apatti tinpam dukkatånem. — kále oe bhikkhave patiggabi- 
tam, vikåle nipakkam, vikåle samsatthem, tam ce pari- 
bhuiljeyys, åpatti dvinnam dukkatánam. kâle ce bhikkhave 
patiggahitam, kâle nipskkam, vikåle samsattham, tam ce 
paribhufijeyya, ара dukketasse. kâle oe bhikkhave pa- 
tiggshitam, kale nipakkam, kale samsattham, tam ce pari- 
bhufsjeyya, anåpattiti. [211211 


tena kho pana samayens gilåvånam bbikkhünam målebi 
bhesajjehi attho hoti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum, 


VI. 3. 1-7. 1.] MAHÅVAGGA. 201 


anujánámi bbikkhave mflani bhessjjáni heliddam singi- 
veram vacam vacattham ativisam katukarobinim ustram 
bhaddamuttakem уйпї và pan’ айћАпі pi atthi mûlåni bhe- 
sajjåni, п’ eva khádaniye khådaviyattam pharanti, na bho- 
janiye bhojaniyattam pharanti, tani patiggahetvå yAvajivam 
periharitum, sati paccaye paribhufijitum. asati paccaye pa- 
ribhuiljantassa ёраб dukkatassé 'ti. |11 tena kho pana 
samayena gilånånam bhikkhünam milehi bhesajjehi pitthehi 
attho hoti, bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave nisadam nisadapotan ti. |2181 


tena kho pana samayena gilånånam bhikkhünam kasåvehi 
bhesajjehi attho hoti. bhagavato etam attham ürocesum. 
snujånåmi bhikkhave kssåvåni bhessjjåni nimbekasávam 
kutajak. pakkevak. nattamålak. yâni vA pan’ añiñáni pi atthi 
kasávabhesajjáni, n’ eva khådaniye kh&daniysttam pharenti 
ne bhojaniye bhojeniyattam pheranti, táni petiggahetvå уй- 
vajivam pariharitum, sati paccaye paribhufjitum. азан 
paccaye paribhufijantassa &patti dukkataseå "ti. |11141 


tens kho pana samayene gilånånam bhikkkünam pannehi 
bhesajjehi attho hoti. bhagavato etam attham årovesum. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave pannåni bhesajjáni nimbapannam 
kutsjap. patolap. sulesip. kappásikap. yâni và pan’ afifiåni 
pi atthi pannåni bhesajjáni, n’ eva khådaniye khüdaniyattam 
pharanti na bhojaniye bhojaniyattam pharanti — la —. 
1161 


tens kho pane samayens gilånånam bhikkhünam phalehi 
bhessjjehi attho hoti — la — anujåuåmi bhikkhave phaláni 
bhessjjåni vilangam pippalam maricam haritakam vibhita- 
kam åmalekam gothephalam уйш và pan’ siifidni pi atthi 
phaláni bhesajjáni, n' eva khádaniye khádaniyattam pha- 
ranti, na bhojaniye bhojaniyattam pharanti — la — ||1 18 I 


tens kho pana samayena gilånånam bhikkhünam jatühi 
bheeajjehi attho hoti — la — anuján&mi bhikkhave jatüni 
bhesajjåni hingu hingujato hingusipátikam takem takepettim 


202 MAHÄVAGGA. (VI. 7. 1-10. 2. 


tekapennim sajjulasam уйш và pan’ аййапї pi atthi jatüni 
bhesajjáni, n' eva kbådaniye khádaniyattam pharanti — la —. 
01170 р 


tena kho рапа samayena gilánánam bhikkhünam lopehi 
bhesajjehi attho hoti — la — anujånåmi bhikkhave lonåni 
bhessjjåni s&muddam kAjalonam sindhavam ubbhidam bilan 
yâni và pan’ aðñåni pi atthi lonåni bheeajjáni, n’ eva khá- 
daniye khådaniyattam pharanti, na bhojaniye bhojaniyattam 
pharanti, tani patiggahetvå yåvajivam pariharitum, sati pa- 
ceaye peribhufijitum. азай paccaye paribhuiijantasss &patti 
dukkatasså "ti. 11111811 


tena kho pana samayens Ayasmato Ánandassa upajjhs- 
yasa Ayasmato Belatthasteassa thullakacchdbédho hoti, 
(азва lasikAya civaråni Куе lagganti. (Апі bhikkhd uda- 
kena temetvå-temetvå apakaddhanti. addasa kho bhagavå 
senüsanacárikam åbipndanto te bhikkhü оі oivaråni uda- 
kena temetvå-temetvå apakaddhante, disvåna yena te bhi- 
kkhü ten’ upasamkami, upesamkamitvå te bhikkhü etad 
avoca: kim imasas bhikkhave bhikkhuno &bádbo "ti. imassa 
bbante Ayasmato thullakecch&badho, lasikåye civaråni kAye 
lagganti, tani mayam udakena temetvå-temetvå apakaddhA- 
má "ti |li atha kho bhegavå etasmim nidåne dhammi- 
ketham katvå bhikkhü Amentesi: anujånåmi bhikkhave 
yassa kandu vA pijakA үй assávo vå thullakacché vå åbådho 
kayo và daggandho, ounnåni bhessjjåni, agilånassa cha- 
kanam mattikam rajananipakkam. ^ anujánümi bhikkhave 
udukkhalam musalan ti. [12191 


tena kho pana samayens gilånåénam bhikkhünam cunpehi 
bhesajjehi cálitehi attho hoti — Is — anujandmi bhikkbave 
ounnachlanin ti. sanhehi attho hoti. anojånåmi bhikkhave 
dussacålanin ti. |111 tene kho pana samayena aññstarassa 
bhikkhuno amanussikåbådho hoti. tam åcariyupajjbåyå 
upatthahentà ndsakkhimsu årogam kåtum. во eükarasünam 
gantvå åmakamarpsam kbádi &makalohitam pivi, tassa so 
&manuasikábàdho petippassambbhi bhagavato etam attham 


VI. 10. 2-19. 3. MAHÅVAGGA. 203 


årocesum. anujdndmi bhikkhave amsnussikåbådhe АшаКа- 
mamsam åmekalohitan ti. 1211101 


tena kho pane samayena afifiatarasen bhikkhuno cakkha- 
rogåbådho hoti. tam bhikkhum pariggahetvà uccåram pi 
pessávam pi nikkhümenti. addasa kho bhagsvá senüsana- 
cárikam Ahindanto te bhikkhü tam bhikkhum pariggabetvå 
uccáram pi passÁvam pi nikkhåmente, disvána yena te bhi- 
kkhü ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitva te bhikkhf etad 
avoca: kim imassa bhikkhave bhikkhuno &bádho ”ti. Ill 
imasss bhante åyasmato cakkhurogábüdho, imam mayam 
periggshetvà uocåram pi passåvam pi nikkhüámemá "ti. atha 
kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne dhammikatham katvå bhikkht 
Amantesi: anujàn&mi bhikkhave afijanam ká|añjanam ra- 
saüjapam eotafljanam gerukam kapallan ti. afijanupapisanehi 
attho hoti — gha — anujånåmi bhikkhave candanam taga- 
ram kålånusåriyam tálisam bhaddamuttakan ti. 121111 


tena kho pans sameyens bhikkhü pittháni afijandni thåli- 
kesu pi saråvakesu pi nikkhipanti, tipsounpehi pi pamsu- 
kehi pi okiriyanti — gha — anuján&mi bbikkhave afijenin 
ti. tena kho pene samayena chabbaggiyå bhikkhü uocá- 
vacA afijaniyo dhárenti sovannamayam rüpiyamayam. ma- 
nusså ujjbåyanti khiyanti vipåcenti : seyyathåpi gibi k&ma- 
bhogino 'ti. bhegsvato etam attham Arocesum. пе bhi- 
kkhave uocåvacå afijani dhåretabbå. yo dháreyys, åpatti 
dukkatassa. enujånåmi bhikkhave atthimayam dantamayam 
visånsmayam nelamayam vejumsyam katthamayam jatuma- 
yam phalamayam lohamayam senkhan&bhimeyan ti. ||l[ 
tens kho pana samayene afljan! apårutå honti. tipscunpebi 
pi pamsukebi pi okiriyanti — la — anujánámi bhikkhave 
spidhánan ti. epidhánam nipetati. anujánümi bhikkhave 
sattakena bandhitvà aüjaniy& bandhitun ti. afijani nipatati. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave suttakena sibbetun ti. |2|| tena kho 
pana samayena bhikkhO anguliyá afijanti. akkhini dukkhA- 
ni honti — la — anujånåmi bhikkhave efljanisalåken ti. 
tena kho pane samayena ohabbaggiyé bhikkhü uccávacá 
afijaniealAkdyo dhårenti sovannamsyam rüpiyamayam. ma- 


204 MAHAVAGGA. (VI. 12. 3-14. 1. 


nusså vjjbåyenti khiyanti vipåcenti: seyyathåpi giht káma- 
bhogino 'ti — la — na bhikkhave uccávacà afljenisalåkå 
dhåretabbå. уо dhfreyya, åpatti dukkatassa. enujånåmi bbi- 
kkhave atthimayam — la — aankhanábhimsyen ti. [|3] tens 
kho pane samayena afljanisalåkk bhOmiyam petità pheruså 
boti —la— anujånåmi bhikkhave selåkodhåniyen ti 
tena kho pana samayena bhikkbñ aüjanim pi afijanisalAkam pi 
hatthena pariharanti — la — auvjånåmi bhikkhave aüjani- 
thavikan ti. amssbandhako na hoti — la — anujånåmi bhi- 
kkhave amsabandhakam bandhanasuttakan 6.419 


tena kho pana samayens Ayasmato Pilindavscchasss 
elaAbhitapo hoti — la — anujánámi bhikkhave muddhani 
telakan ti. na kkhameniyo hoti — la — anujånåmi bhi- 
kkhave natthukamman ti. natthu galati — la — anu- 
.jånåmi bhikkhave natthukeranin ti. tena kho pana sam- 
ayena chabbaggiy& bhikkhü uccávacá patthukaraniyo 
dhårenti sovannamayam rüpiyamayam. manusså ujjh&yanti 
khiyanti vipåcenti: seyyathåpi giht kamabhogino 'ti. na 
bhikkhave uccávacá natthukerani dháretabbá. yo dhåreyya, 
Apatti dukkatassa. anujånåmi bhikkhave atthimayam — la — 
sankhandbhimayan ti. |10  netthum visamam siücenti. 
enujünámi bhikkhave yamakenatthukeranin ti. ma 
kkhameniyo hoti. anujàn&mi bhikkbave dhümam p&tun 
ti. tañ fleva vattim Alimpetva pivanti. kantham dahati 
— la — anvjånåmi bhikkhave dhümanettan ti. tena kho 
pene ssmayens chebbaggiy& bhikkhü uccávao&ni dhü- 
manettåni dhárenti . . . (сотр. § 1.) . . . sefikhanåbbima- 
yan ti. tens kho pana вашеуепе dhümanettàni apárutáni 
honti, påpakå pavisanti — la — anujánàmi bhikkhave api- 
dhånan ti. tena kho pana samayens bhikkhü dhümanettáni 
hatthens pariharavti. enujånåmi bhikkhave dhfimenetta- 
thaviken ti eketo ghamsiyanti — la — anujün&mi bhi- 
kkhave yamsketbeviken ti. amsabandhako na hoti 
— a — anuján&ámi bhikkhave amsabandhakem bandha- 
nasuttakan ti. [2181 


tena kho pana samsyena åyasmato Pilindavacohassa 


VI. 14 1-5.] MAHAVAGGA. 205 


våtåbådho hoti.  vejjà evam &hamsu: telam pacitabban ti. 
anujanimi bhikkhave telapAkan ti. tasmim kho pana te- 
lspáke majjam pakkhipitabbam hoti. anujánámi bbikkhave 
telapåke majjam pakkhipitun ti. tena kho pana samayena 
chabbaggiyå bhikkhü atipakkhittamajjani telåni pacanti. 
tani pivitvå mejjanti. ne bhikkhave atipakkhittamajjam te- 
lam pátabbem. уо piveyya, yathidhammo kåretabbo. anu- 
jånåmi bhikkhave yasmim telspåke majjassa na vanno na 
gandho ne reso pafifidyati, evarfipam majjapakkhittam telam 
рёќоп ti. | li tena kho pana samayena bhikkhünam bahum 
atipakkhittamajjam telam pakkam hoti. etha kho bhikkhünam 
etad ahosi : ketham nu kho atipakkhittamaijje tele patipajji- 
tabben ti. anujånåmi bhikkhave abbhaíljanam adhittha- 
tun ti. tena kho pana samayena áyasmato Pilinde- 
vacchasea bahutaram telam pakkam hoti, telsbbåjavam na 
samvijjati. anujånåmi bhikkhave tini tumbåni lohatumbam 
katthatumbam pbalatumban ti. |2|| tena kho pana mm- 
ayena dyasmato Pilindavacchassa afigavåto hoti, anu- 
jånåmi bhikkhave sedakammean ti. na kkhamantyo boti. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave sambhårssedan ti. na kkhamaniyo 
hoti. &nuj&u&mi bhikkhave mahásedan ti. na kkhama- 
niyo hoti. апојёоёші bhikkhave bhangodakan ti. na 
kkbamantyo hoti. snujánàmi bbikkbave udakekotthakan ti. 
131 tena kho pana samayena åyasmato Pilindavacchassa 
pabbaváto hoti. anujdndmi bhikkhave lohitam mocetun 
ti. na kkhamaniyo hoti. anujânâmi bhikkhave lohitam 
mocetvå visånena gahetun ti. tena kho pana samayena 
Ayasmato Pilindavacchassa pådå pbålitå honti. anujá- 
nåmi bhikkhave padabbhafijanan ti. na kkhamaniyo hoti. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave pejjem sbhisamkbaritun ti. tena 
kho pane samayena afifiatarassa bhikkhuno gandåbådho boti. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave satthakammam. kesAvodakena attho 
hoti. anujånåmi bhikkhave kasåvodaken ti. tilakakke- 
па attho hoti. eanujånåmi bhikkbave tilakakkan ti. |141 
kabalikåya attho hoti. anujånåmi bhikkhave kabslikan 
ti. vanabandhanacolena attho hoti. anujånåmi bhikkhave 
vanabandhanacolan ti. vago kanduvati. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave sásepakuttens phositun ti. vago kilijjitthe, 


906 MAHÅVAGGA. (VI. 14 6-15. 1. 


anujánámi bbikkheve dhümam kátun ti. vanamamsam 
vuttbåti.  anujånåmi bhikkhave loyasakkharikáya 
obinditun ti. vano na rühati enujånåmi bhikkhave va- 
natelan ti. telam galati. bhagavato etam attham üroce- 
sum. anujánámi bhikkhave vikAsikam sabbam vanapati- 
kamman ti. ||5|| tena kho pana samayena ailiiataro bhikkhu 
shinå dattho hoti bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anu- 
jånåmi bhikkhave cattéri mahávikatáni datum gåtham 
mutta cbárikam mattikan ti. atha kho bbikkhünam etad 
ahosi : appatiggabitåni nu kho udåhu patiggabetabbåniti. 
bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave 
aati kappiyakårake patiggahåpetum, авай keppiyekérake 
eAmam gahetvå paribhuüjitun ti. tena kho pana sameyena 
еййаќагепа bhikkhund visam pitam hoti. snuján&mi bhi- 
kkhave gütham påyetun ti. athe kho bhikkhünam etad 
ahosi: appatiggshito nu kho udåhu patiggahápetabbo 'ti, 
avujånåmi bhikkhave yam karonto patigganhåti sv eva 
petiggaho kato, na ропа patiggahåpetabbo ”ti. [|6] tens 
kho pana samayens аййаїагавва bhikkhuno gheradinnaka- 
bådho boti. anujánámi bhikkhave sit&lo]im påyetun ti. 
tena kho pana samayena аййаѓаго bhikkhu dutthagahaniko 
hoti. anujånåmi bhikkbave AmisakhAram påyetun ti. 
tens kho pana samayens aññatarases bbikkhuno panduro- 
gåbådho hoti. anojånåmi bhikkhave muttsharitekam 
påyetun ti. tena kho pana samayena afifiatarassa bhikkhuno 
chavidosåbådho boti. anujånåmi bhikkhave gandhálepam 
kátun 6. tens kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu abhi- 
sannakåyo hoti. enujånåmi bhikkhave virecanam påtun 
ti. acchakafjjiyå attho hoti. anujånåmi bhikkhave accha- 
kaüjikan ti akatayQsena sttho hoti anujånåmi bhi- 
kkhave aketay üsan ti. kathkatena attho hoti. anvjånåmi 
bhikkhave katiketan ti. peticchådaniyens attho hoti. 
anuján&mi bhikkhave patioohádaniyan ti. (71141 


tena kho pana samayens AyasmA Pilindavacoho Råja- 
gahe pabbháram sodhåpeti lepam kattukåmo. atha kho 
råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro yenáyssmá Pilinds- 
vacoho ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå áyasmantam Pilin- 


VI. 18. 1-4.) MAHÅVAGGA. 207 


davaochem abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi. ekamentam 
nisinno kho råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro Áyasmantam 
Pilindavaccham etad avoca: kim bhante thero kåråpettti. 
pebbbåram mahåråja sodhåpemi lepam ksttukåmo 'ti. attho 
bhante аууавва åråmikenå 'ti. na kho mabåråja bhagavatå 
åråmiko anufiflåto "і. tena hi bhante bhagavantam pati- 
pucchitvé mama åroceyyåthå "ti. evam mahårfjå ’ti kho 
&yasmá Pilindavaccho rafifio Mågadbassa Seniyassa Bimbi- 
sárasss paccsssosi. [1| еа kho åyasmå Pilindavaccho 
rájánam Mågadbam Seniyam Bimbisåram dhammiy& kathåya 
sandassesi samádapesi samuttejesi sampsharnsesi. atha kho 
råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro åyasmatå Pilindavacohena 
dhammiyå katbåya sandassito samádapito samuttejito sampa- 
bamsito uttbåyåeanå áyssmantam Pilindavacoham sbhivå- 
detvå pedakkhipam katvå pekk&mi. atha kho åyasmå 
Pilindavacoho bhagavato santike dütam påbesi: råjå bhante 
Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisdro åråmikam dåtukåmo. katbam 
nu kho bhante patipejjitabban ti. atha kho bhagavå 
etasmim nidàne dhammiketham katvå bhikkhü Amantesi: 
anujánámi bhikkhave &rámikan ti. |21 dutiyam pi kho 
råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro yenåyasmå Pilindavaocho 
ten’ upssamkemi, upasamkamitvA Ayasmantam Pilindava- 
echam abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi. ekamentam nisinno 
kho rájà Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro Syasmantam Pilinda- 
vaccham etad avoca: anuññâto bhante bhagavatå åråmiko 
'ti. evam mahárájá 'ti. tena hi bhante ауувзва åråmikam 
dammiti. stha kho råjå Mågadho беріуо Bimbisåro &yasma- 
to Pilindavacchassa árámikam patisunitvå vissaritvå cirena 
estim patilsbbitvå aññataram sabbatthakam mahåmattam 
Amantesi: yo may bhane ayyassa åråmiko patissuto dinno 
so åråmiko 'ti. na kho deva ayyassa åråmiko dinno "ti. 
kivaciram nu kho bhane ito hitam hotiti. 131 atha kho so 
mahámatto rattiyo viganetvå råjånam Mágadham Seniyam 
Bimbisåram etad avoca: paños deva rattisståniti. tena bi 
bhane ayyassa райса åråmikssatåni dethá 'ü. evam devå ’ti 
kho so mabåmatto гаййо Mågadbasss Seniyassa Bimbiefrassa 
patisunitvé &yasmsto Pilindavacchasss райса åråmikasatåni 
pådås;, påtiyekko gåmo nivisi. Åråmikagåmo "ti pi nam 


908 MAHÅVAGGA. [VI. 18. 4-7. 


Ahamsu, Pilindagåmo ’ti pi nam ühameu. tena kho pana 
samayena åyasmå Pilindavaccho tasmim gåmake kulüpako 
hoti. atha kho åyasmå Pilindavacoho pubbanhasamayam 
nivåsetvå pattacivaram ådåya Pilindagåmam pindåye påvisi. 
141 tena kho pana вашауепа tasmim gåmake ussavo hoti, 
dårikå alamkatå målåkitå Капі. atha kho åyasmå Pilinda- 
'vaccho Pilindagámske sapadánam pindáya caramAno yena 
afifiatarassa Åråmikasss nivesanam ten’ upasamkami, upa- 
samkamitvå pafifiatte Asane nisidi. tena kho pana samayena 
tasså åråmikiniyå dhitá аййе dáreke alamkate målåkite passitvå 
rodati: málam me detha, alamkåram me detbå ‘ti. atha kho 
Ayasmå Pilindavaccho tam åråmikinim etad avoca: kissåyam 
dårikå rodatiti. ayam bhante dårikå aññe dårake alamkate 
målåkite passitvå rodati: målam me detha, alamkaram me 
дед ’ti. kuto amhåkam duggstánam målå, kuto alamkåro 
ti. 5il atha kho &yasm& Pilindevaccho afifiataram tinandu- 
рекат gahetvå tam åråmikinim etad avoca: hand’ imam 
tinandupakam (азай dårikåya sise patimufteå 'ti. atha kho 
ef Åråmikini tam tinandupakam gahetvå tasså dårikåye sise 
patimuflci. så ahosi suvannamålå abhirüp& dassaniya påså- 
diké, n’ etthi tádisà гаййо pi antepure suvapnemålå. ma- 
nusså rañño Mágadhassa Seniyassa Bimbisårassa Arocesum : 
amukassa дета åråmiksssa ghare suvannemålå abhirüpà 
dassaniyå påsådiké, n’ atthi tådiså devassa pi antepure su- 
vapnamålå. kuto tassa duggatassa. nissamsayam corikåya 
Abhaté "ti. atha kho råjå Magadho Seniyo Bimbisåro tam 
åråmikalulam bandhåpesi. 161 dutiyem pi kho åyasmå Pi- 
lindavaccho pubbaphesamayam nivåsetvå pattacivaram &dáya 
Pilindagåmam pindéya pávisi. Pilindagåmake sapadánam 
pindåya caramüno yena tassa åråmikassa nivesanam ten’ upa- 
samkami, upasamkamitvå pativissake puochi: kaham imam 
&rümikakulam gatan ti. etisså bhante suvappamáülüya kåra- 
na таййА bendhápitan ti. atha kho åyasmå Pilindavaccho ye- 
na гаййо Mågadhassa Seniyassa Bimbisårassa nivesanam ten’ 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvå pafifiatte Asane nisldi. atha kho 
råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro yen&yasmá Pilindavaccho 
ten’ upasamkami, upasamkemitvå &yasnantam Pilindava- 
echam abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi. ekamantam nisinnam 


VI. Ш. 7-16. 1.] MAHÁVAGGA. 209 


kho rájinam Mágadham Seniyam Bimbisáram åyssmå Pi- 
lindavaccho etad avoca: ||7|| kiasa mabåråje åråmikskulenr 
bandhápitan ti. tassa bhante &árámikassa ghare suvanpamálá 
abhirûpå даззапіуё pdsidiké, n’ atthi tådiså ambákam pi 
antepure suvannamålå. kuto tassa duggatassa. nissamsayam 
oorikåye &bhatá 'ti. athe kho åyasmå Pilindavaccho rafifio 
Maågadhasss Seniyasea Bimbisårasss påsådam suvannan ti 
sdhimucci, во ahoai sabbo sovannamayo. idam pana te ma- 
håråja tåvabehum suvannam kuto "і, aüüütam bhante, 
ayyasea eso iddhånubbåvo "і tam åråmikakulem muilcApesi. 
181 manueså вууепе kira Pilindavacchena sar&jik&yo pari- 
sÁya uttarimanussadhammam iddbipåtibåriyem dassitan ti 
attamand abhippesannd åyasmato Pilindavacchassa panca 
bhesajjåni abhiharimsu seyyath’ idam: sappim navanitam 
telam madhum phánitan ti. pakatiyåpi ca åyasmå Pilinda- 
vaccho låbhi hoti, paficannam bhesajjánam laddbam-laddbam 
parisåya viasajjesi —pariså с’ assa hoti båbullikå, laddhem 
-laddham kolambe pi ghate pi påretvå patisåmeti, parissåva- 
nAni pi thevikåyo pi påretvå vàtapánesu lagganti, tani olina- 
vilinåni tittbenti, undurebi pi vibårå okipnavikipp& honti. 
manusså vibárecárikam åbindantå pessitvå ujjbåyanti khi- 
yanti vipåcenti : antokottbågårikå ime samanå Sakyaputtiyå 
seyyathåpi таја Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro ”ti. |J9|| assosum 
kho bhikkhü tesam manusadoam ujjháyantánam kbiyantå- 
nam vipåcentånam. ye te bhikkhü appicchá te ujjbåyenti 
khiyanti vipücenti: katham bi ойша bhikkhü evarüp&ys bå- 
hullåya oetessantiti. atha kho te bhikkhü bhagavato etam. 
attham årocesum. saccam kira bhikkhave bhikkhå everü- 
påya báhulláye oetentiti. eaccam bhaguvå. vigarahitvd 
dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü åmantesi: yåni kho pana 
tani gilånånam bhikkhünam patisdyaniyAni bhessjjåni 
seyyath' idem : sappi naveoitam telam madhu phanitam, tå- 
ni petiggahetvà sattáhaparamam sennidhikdrakam 
paribhofijitabbini, tam atikkAmayato yath&dhammo kå- 
retabbo 'ti. 1101151 
bhesajjaanufifiåtabbånavåram pathamam. 


aths kho bhagavå Savatthiyam yath&bhirentam viha- 


voL. ш. 14 


210 MAHÅVAGGA. (VI. 16. 1-17. 4. 


ritvå yena Råjagaham tena cårikam pakkAmi. addam kho 
fyasmé Kenkhárevato anterá magge gulakaranam okka- 
mitvå gule pittham pi chárikem pi pakkhipante, disvána 
Skappiyo gu]o såmiso, na kappati gu]o тіке peribhuüjitun 
ti kukkuecåyanto sapariso gujam ne paribhuiijati, ye pi ‘sm 
sotabbam mafifianti, te pi gulam ne paribhufijanti. bhaga- 
vato etam attham Arocesum. kimatthiyå bhikkhave gule 
pittham pi chárikam pi pakhkhipantiti. thaddhanatth&ya 
bhagavå 'ti. васе bhikkhave thaddbanstthåya gule pittham 
pi obårikem pi pakkbipenti so ca gujo tv eva samkham 
gacohati, anujånåmi bhikkhave yath&sukham gulam pari- 
bhofijitun ti. |lj  addasa kbo &yasmá Kankhárevato 
entará шарре vacce muggam jåtam, passitvå akappiyå 
muggá, pakkápi muggå jöyantiti kukkuccáyanto sapariso 
maggam na paribhufijati, ye pi ‘ssa sotabbam mafifianti, te 
рі muggam па paribbufljanti. bhagavato etam attham âro- 
oesum. sace bhikkhave pakkåpi muggå jüyanti, anujånåmi 
bhikkhave yathüsukham торрат peribbuüjitun ti [|2] 
tena kho pane samsyens aññatarassa bhikkhuno udarevåtå- 
bådho hoti, so lopasovirakam apåyi, tassa so udaravåtåbådho 
patippassambhi. bhagavato etam attham &rooesum. anujå- 
nami bhikkhave gilânassa lonasovirakem, agi 

udakasambhinnam pánaparibhogena paribhufijitun ti. 31161 


atha kho bhagavA anupubbens cárikem caramåno yena 
Rájegeham tad avasari. tatra водат bbagavå Råjagehe 
vihareti Veluvane Kalsndakanivåpe. tena kho pana 
samayene bhagavato udaravåtåbådho hoti. atha kho Ayasmå 
Ånendo pubbe pi bhagavato udaravåtåbådho tekstulåya 
yåguyå phüsu hotiti s&mam tilam pi tandulam рі muggam 
pi paññàpetvà anto våsetvå anto aimam pacitvå bhagavato 
upanåmesi pivatu bhagavå tekatulayügun ti. 111 j&nent&pi 
tathågatå pucchanti, jánentápi na pucchanti, külam viditvå 
pucchanti, Кат viditvå na pucchanti, stthasambitam tathå- 
gatå puochanti no anatthasamhitar, anatthasamhite setu- 
gbåto tethágatànam. dvibi &kárehi buddh& bhagavanto 
bhikkhü petipuccbanti, dbammam vå desessåme, såvakånam 
và sikkhápadam pefiflåpessåmå ’ti, atha kho bhagavå йува- 


VI. 17.2-7.) MAHÄVAGGA. 211 


mantam Ånendam åmantesi: kut’ åyam Ánanda yigà "ti. 
atha kho üyasmá Ånando bhagavato etam attham Агосеві, 
21  vigarahi buddho bhegavé: ananucchaviyam Ananda 
snanolomikam appatirüpem саравал akeppiyam el 


cetessasi. a api Ananda aito vag tad api akappiyam, 
yad api anto pakkam tad api akappiyam, yad api såmam 
pakkam tad spi akappiyam. п’ etam Ananda appasannánam 
và pasådåya. vigarabitvå dhammikatham katvà bhikkhü 
amantesi: na bhikkhave anto vuttham anto pakkam 
såmam pakkam paribbuüjitebbam. уо paribhuiijeyya, 
Apatti dukkatassa. ||J|| anto ce bhikkhave vuttham anto 
pakkam såmam pakkam, tañ ce paribhuiijeyya, åpatti tinpam 
dukkatánam. anto ce bhikkhave vuttham anto pakkam 
еййеһі pakkam, tañ ce paribhuiijeyya, åpatti dvinnam 
dukkatinam. anto oe bhikkhave vuttham bahi pakkam 
såmam pakkam, tañ ce paribhufijeyya, åpatti dvinnam dukka- 
fånam. |14] babi ce bhikkhave vuttham anto pakkam 
såmam pakkam, tañ ce paribhuñjeyya, åpatti dvinnam dukka- 
{Апаш. anto ce bhikkhave vattham bahi pakkam aññehi 
pakkam, tañ ce paribhuñjeyya, åpatti dukkatassa. bahi co 
bhikkhave vuttham anto pakkam aññehi pakkam, tañ ce 
paribhuñjeyya, &pstti dukkatessa. bahi ce bhikkhave vu- 
ttham bahi pakkam såmam pakkar, tañ ce paribhuñjeyya, 
&patti dukkstassa. bahi oe bhikkhave vuttham bahi pakkam 
eüñehi pakkam, tañ ce paribhuñjeyya, anåpattiti. |161] tene 
kho pana samayena bhikkbü bhagavatà såmampåko pati- 
kkhitto "і punap&ke kukkuccâyanti. bhagavato etam attham 
Árocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave punapåkem pacitun ti, 
1611 tena kho pana samayena Rájagaham dubbbikkham ho- 
ti. manusså lonam pi telam pi tandulam pi khådeniyem pi 
åråmam Aharanti, tani bhikkhü bahi våsenti, ukkapindakåpi 
khådanti coråpi haranti. bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. 
&nujánüámi bhikkhave anto våsetun ti. anto våsetvå bahi 
påcenti, damakå parivårenti.  bhikkhü avissattbå pari- 
bhufjanti. bhagaveto etam attham Arocesum. anujånbmi 
bhikkhave anto psoitun ti. dubbbikkhe kappiyskårakå 
bahutaram haranti, appataram bhikkhünam denti. bhaga- 


212 MAHÄVAGGA. (VI. 17. 7-18. 1. 


vato elam attham årocesum. anvjånåmi bhikkhave såmam 
pacitum. anujånåmi bhikkhave anto vuttham anto 
pakkam eámam pakkan ti. ||7|| tena kho pane sama- 
yena sambabulå bhikkhü Kasieu vassam vutthå Rájaga- 
ham gacobantå bhagavantam дазвапёув апіатё шарре na 
labhimeu lükbassa và panitessa và bhojanassa yávadaitham 
páripürim, bahufi ca phalakhádaniyam ahoei, kappiyak&rako 
са na ahosi. atha kho te bhikkhü kilantarüpà yena Råja- 
gaham Veluvanam Kalandakanivapo yens bhagavå 
ten’ upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivá- 
detvå ekamantam nisidimsu. Acinnam kho pan’ etam buddhå- 
nam bhagavantinam Agantukehi bhikkhühi saddhim раб- 
sammoditum. atha kho bhagavå te bhikkhü etad avoca: 
kacci bhikkbave khamantyam, kscci yåpeniyam, kacci "ttha 
appakilamathena addhånam Agatd, kuto ca tumhe bhikkhave 
&gaochatbå 'ti 181 khamaniyam bhagavá, idha mayam 
bhante КАвівц vassam vutthå Rájagaham Agacchantà bha- 
gavantam dassanüya antará шарре na lebbimbå lükhassa vå 
panitasss và bhojenassa yåvadattbam páripürim, bahufi ca 
phalakhádeniyam ahosi, keppiyakárako ca na ahosi, tena 
mayam kilantarüpá addhánam ågatå 'ti. atha kho bhagavá 
etasmim nidåue dhammikatham ketvå bhikkhü åmantesi: 
anuján&mi bhikkhave yatthe phalakbádaniyam passati kappi- 
yakårako ca na hoti, s&mam gehetvå haritvå Карріув- 
k&rekam passitvå bhümiyam nikkhipitvå petiggahåpetvå 
paribhufjitum. anujånåmi bhikkhave uggashitam pa- 
tiggsbitun ti. |9/17 


tena kho рапа samsyens afifiatarassa bråhmaņassa navá 
ca tilå navafi ca madhum uppanná honti, atha kho tassa 
brühmanassa etad ahosi: yam nånåham nave ca tile navail 
са madhum buddhapamukbassa bhikkhusamghassa dadeyyen 
ti. atha kho so bråhmano yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitva bhagavatå saddhim sammodi. sammodani- 
yam katham såranlyam vitisåretvå ekamantam atthåsi, akam- 
antam thito kho so bråhmano bhagavantam etad avoca: 
adhivåsetu me bhante bbavam Gotamo svatandya bhattam 
saddhim bhikkhusamghend 'ti. adhivüsesi bhagavá tunhi- 


VI. 19. 1-19. 1.] MAHÅVAGGA. 213 


bhåvene. atha kho so bráhmano bhagavato adhivüsanam 
viditvå pakk&mi. 111 atha kho so bråhmeno tasså rattiyA 
accayena panitam khádaniyam bhojaniyam patiyådåpetvå 
bhegavato kålam ёгосёреві : Ко bho Gotama, nitthitam 
bhattan ti. atha kho bhagavå pubbanhasamayam nivåsetvå 
pettactvaram &dáya yena tassa bråhmanassa nivesanam ten” 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvå paññatte dsane nisidi saddbim 
bhikkhusamghena. atha kho so bråhmano buddhapamu- 
kham bhikkhusamgham panitena khádaniyena bhojaniyena 
sahatthà santappetvå sampavåretvå bhagavantam bhuttávim 
enitspsttapánum ekamantam nisidi. ekamantam nisinnam 
kho tam bráhmenam bhagavå dhammiyá katháya sandassetvå 
samádapetvà samuttejetvå sampahamsetvà utthåyåsanå pa- 
kkAmi. ||2l| atha kho tassa bráhmapassa acirapakkantassa 
bhagavato etad ahosi: yesam kho maya atthåya buddhapa- 
mukho bhikkhusamgho nimantito nave ca tile naval ca 
madhum dassåmiti, te mayå pamutthá datum. yam пфпА- 
ham nave ca tile navafi ca madhum kolambehi ca ghatehi 
са åråmam harüpeyyan ti. atha kho so bráhmano nave 
са tile navafi ca madhum kolambebi са ghatehi ca árámam 
fharfpetvé yena bhagav& ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitva 
ekamantam atthåsi, ekamantam thito kho so bråhmano bha- 
gevantam etad avoca: ||J] yesam kho mayá bho Gotama 
atthdya buddhapamukho bhikkhusamgho nimantito nave ca 
tile navañ ca madhum dassámíti, te meyå pamutthå dátum, 
petiganhåtu me bhavam Gotamo nave ca tile navafi ca 
medhun ti. tena hi bråbmans bhikkhfinam dehiti. tene 
kho pana samayens bhikkhà dubbhikkhe appamattake pi 
pavårenti patisamkhåpi patikkhipanti, sabbo ca samgho pa- 
vårito hoti, bhikkhü kukkuceåyantå na patiganhenti. pati- 
ganhathe bhikkhave paribhufijatha.  anujünümi bhikkhave 
tato nihetam bhuttåvinå pavüritena anatirittam pari- 
bhofijitan ti, [4118 


tena kho pana samayena Ayasmato Upanandassa Sa- 
kyaputtasee upatthdkakulam samghass' atthåya khádani- 
yam páhesi: аууавва Upanandassa dassetvå samghassa då- 
tabban ti. tena kho pana samayena &yasmá Upenando 


214 MAHÁVYAQGA. (VI. 19. 1-90. 2. 


Bakysputto gåmam pindåya pavittho hoti. atha kho te ma- 
nuseå $råmam gantvå bhikkhà pucchimsu: kaham bhante 
ayyo Upanando 'ti. esávuso &yssmá Upanando Bakyaputto 
gåmam pindåya pavittho ‘ti. idam bhante khådaniyam 
ayyassa Upanandassa dassetvü samghassa dåtabban ti. bha- 
gavato etam attham årocesum. tena hi bhikkhave patigga- 
hetvå nikkhipatha yáva Upanando Agacchatiti. |11 atha 
kho fyasmå Upanando Sakyaputto purebhattam kuláni pa- 
yirupåsitvå diva ágacchL tena kho pana samayene bhikkhå 
dubbhikkhe eppamattake pi pavårenti patisamkhápi pati- 
kkhipanti, sabbo ca samgho pavårito hoti, bbikkhü kukku- 
ocåyantå па patiganhenti. patigaphatha bhikkhave pari- 
bhufijeths, anujandmi bhikkhsve purebhsttam pati- 
ggehitem bhuttåviné paváritena anatirittam paribhufijitun 
ti. 121191 


atha kho bbagavå Råjagahe yathåbhirantam viharitvå 
yona Såvattbi tena cårikam pakkAmi, anupubbene cårikam 
caramåno yena Såvatthi tad avasari. tatra andam bhagavå 
Såvattbiyem viharati Jetavane Anåthapindikasse 
frame. tens kho pans samayens åyasmato Sériputtasea 
kåysdåhåbådho hoti, atha kho åyasmå Mahåmoggallå- 
no yenåyasmå Såriputto ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvé 
Ayasmantam Såriputtam etad avoca: pubbe te Avuso Båri- 
putta kåyadéhåbådbo kena pbåsu hotiti. bhisehi ca me 
&vuso mulålikåhi cå ‘ti. atha kho &yasmá Mahåmoggallåno 
eeyyathåpi nima balavå puriso sammiiijitam vå båbam paså- 
reyya pasåritam và båham sammifijeyya, evam eva Jetavane 
antarahito Mandåkiniyå pokkharaniyå tire påturahosi. 
Hli addasa kho afifiataro någo åyasmantam Mahåmoggallå- 
nam dårato 'va ågacohantam, disvåna 4yasmantam Mahå- 
moggallånam etad avoca : etu kho bhante ayyo Mahåmoggs- 
llåno, svágatam bbante ayyassa Mah&moggallünassa, kena 
bhante ayyassa attho, kim dammiti. bhisehi ca me åvuso 
attho mulålikåhi cá 'ti. atha kho so någo afiflataram nágam 
Andpesi : tene hi bhane ayyassa bhise ca mulålikåyo ca yåvad- 
sttham dehiti. athe kbo so någo Maudåkinim pokkhara- 
pim ogåhetvå sopd&ya bhisafi ca mulåli ca abbåbitvå suvi- 


VI. 90. 2-28. 2.] . MAHÁYAGGA., 215 


kkhálitam vikkbåletvå bhapdikam bandhitvå yenåyasmå Ma- 
håmoggallåno ten’ upasamkami. |2] айа kho &yasmá 
Mabåmoggallåno seyyathåpi піша balavà puriso sammifiji- 
tam vA båham pesåreyya pasåritam và båham sammifjeyya, 
evam eva Mandåkiniyå pokkharapiy& tire antarahito Jeta- 
vane påturahodi, so pi kho någo Mandákiniyà pokkherapiyá 
tire antarahito Jetavane påturahosi. atba kho so någo 
&yasmsto Mahümoggallánassa bhise са mulålikåyo ca pa- 
tiggahåpetvå Jetavane antarshito Mapdåkiniyå pokkhara- 
niyé tire páturshos. atha kho &yasmüá Mahimoggallåno 
4yasmato Sáriputtasss bhise ca mulålikåyo са upan&meaL 
atha kho åyasmato Såriputtassa bhise ca mulålikåyo ca pa- 
ribhuttasaa kåyadåh&bådho patippassambhi. bah bhiså ca 
mu]&likáyo ca avasitthá honti.|3|| tena kho pana samsyens 
bhikkhå dubbhikkhe appamattake pi pavårenti patisamkhapi 
patikkhipanti, sabbo ca samgho pavárito hoti, bhikkhå ku- 
kkuccáyantá na patiganhanti. patigaphstha bhikkhave pari- 
bhufjsthe. anujånåmi bhikkhave vanettham pokkha- 
rattham bhuttåvinå pavåritene anatirittam paribhuñjitun 
ti. 141201 


tens kho pana samayena SAvatthiyam bahum phalakbå- 
daniyam ussannam hoti kappiyakårako ca na hoti. bhikkhü 
kukkuccáyantá phalam na paribhufijanti. bhagavato etam 
&ttham årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave abijam nibbatta- 
bijam akatakappam phalam paribhufjitun ti. |1 191) 


atha kho bhagavå Såvetthiyam yathåbhirantam viha- 
ritvå yena Rájagsham tena cårikam pakkåmi. anupubbe- 
ns cárikam саташёпо yens Rájagsham tad svaseri. tatra 
sudam bhagavå Rajagahe viharati Veluvane Kalanda- 
kanivåpe. tens kho pans samsyens aññatarassa bhikkhuno 
bhagandalåbådho hoti. Åkåsagotto vejjo satthakammam 
karoti. atha kho bhagavå senüsanacárikam &hindanto yena 
tassa bhikkhuno vibéro ten’ upasemkami. 111 аддала kho 
ÂkAsagotto vejjo bhagavantam dårato "va agacchantam, dis- 
vâna bhagavantam etad avoca: ågacchstu bhavam Gotamo 
imassa bhikkhuno vaccamaggam passatu seyyathüpi godhA- 


916 MAHÁVAGGA, (УІ. 29.2-93. 2. 


mukban ti. atha kho bhagevá mamam khv Ayam moghapuri- 
so uppandetiti tunhibhåto 'va patinivattitvå etasmim nidáne 
etaamim pakarane bhikkhusamgham sannipåtåpetvå bhikkhü 
patipucchi: atthi kira bhikkhave amukasmim vihåre bhikkhu 
gilåno "і. atthi bhagavá'ti, kim tassa bhikkhave bhikkhuno 
åbådho "ti. tassa bhante åyasmato bhagandalåbådho, Áká- 
sagotto vejjo satthakammam karotiti. |2|| vigarahi buddho 
bbagavå : ananuccheviyam bhikkhave tassa moghaparisasss 
anenulomikam appatiråpam assAmanakam akappiyam aka- 
raniyam. Каат hi náms so bhikkhave moghapuriso 
sambádhe satthakammam kárápessatiti. sambådhe bbikkhe- 
ve sukhumå chavi, duropayo vano, dupperibåram sattham. 
n’ etam bhikkhave appesannånam vá pasådåye. vigara- 
hitvà dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü Amantesi: na bhi- 
kkhave sambådhe satthakammam kåråpetabbam. уо 
kåråpeyye, Apatti thullacoayasså ‘ti. |31 tena kho pana 
samayens ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü bhagsvatå sattha- 
kammam patikkbittan ti vatthikammam kåråpenti ye 
te bhikkhü appiochá te wjjbåyanti khiyanti vipåcenti: 
katham hi nama chebbeggiy& bhikkbO vatthikammam kårå- 
pessantiti. stha kho te bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham 
Arocesum. saccam kira bhikkhave chabbaggiyé bhikkhü 
vatthikammam kåråpentiti. saccam bhagavá. vigarahitv& 
dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü Amantes: na bhikkhave 
sambådhassa sámentá dvangulá satthakammam vå 
vatthikammam vA kåråpetabbam. yo kåråpeyya, Apatti 
thullaccayassé "ti. 41221 


atha kho bbagavå R&jegahe yatbåbhirantam viharitvå 
yona Bårånasi tena cárikam pakkåmi. anupubbens cári- 
kam caramåno yena Bårånast tad avasarL tatra sudam bha- 
gavå Bårånasiyam viharati Isipatane migadåye. tens 
kho pana samayena Bårånasiyam Suppiyo ca upåsako 
Suppiyå ca upåsikå ubhatopasann& bonti d&yakA kårakå 
samghupattbåkå. athe kho Suppiyå upåsikå árámam gantvå 
vibárena vihåram parivenena parivenam upasamkamitvå bhi- 
kkhü pucchati: ko bhante giláno, kassa kim ühariyyatü 
Эй, 111 tena kho pana samayene afifiatarena bhikkhunà 


VI. 83. 2-5.] MAHÁVAGGA. 217 


virecanam pitam hoti. atha kho so bhikkhu Suppiyam 
npåsikam etad avoca: mayá kho bhagini virecanam pitam, 
attho me paticchådaniyenå 'ti, suttbu ayya áhariyissatiti 
gharam gantvå antevåsim Anfpesi: gaccha bhane pavatta- 
mamsam jünáhiti. evam ayye'ti kho so puriso Suppiyåya 
upåsikåya patisupitvà kevalakappam Bårånasim åhipdanto 
па addasa pavattamamsam. atha kho so puriso yena Suppiyå 
upåsikå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå Suppiyam upåsi- 
kam etad avoca: n’ atth' ayye pavattamamsam, måghåto 
ajjå ”ti. 121 atha kho Suppiy&ya upåsikåye etad ahoai: 
tassa kho gildnessa bhikkhuno patiochådaniyam alabbantasss 
&b&dho vå abhivaddhiesati kálamkiriy& vå bhaviasati, na kho 
me {аш patirüpam yñham patisapitvá na haråpeyyan ti po- 
tthanikam gahetvå ürumamsam ukkantitvå dåsiyå ad&si: 
hands je imam mamsam sampådetvå amukasmim vihåre bhi- 
kkhu gilåno tassa dajjehi, yo ca mam pucchati gilånå 'ti pati- 
vedehiti uttarüsangena (гага vethetvå ovarakam pavisitvå 
maficake nipejji. 311 atha kho Suppiyo upåsako gharam gan- 
två dåsim pucchi: kaham Suppiyå 'ti. esåyya ovarake nipannå 
"ti. atha kho Suppiyo up&aako yena Suppiyå upåsikk ten’ 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvå Suppiyam upåsikam etad avoca: 
kisa nipannásiti. gilån' ambiti. kin te &bádho 'ti. atha 
kho Suppiy& upåsikå Suppiyasas upüsskeasa etam attham 
Агосеві. atha kho Suppiyo upåsako acchariyam vata bho 
ebbhutam vata bho yåva saddhåyam Suppiy& pasannå, yatra 
hi nåma attano pi mamsáni pariccattåni, kim pana imåya 
aüilam kifici adeyyam bhavissatiti hattho udaggo yena bha- 
gavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhi- 
vådetvå ekamantam nisidi. |4] ekamantam півіппо kho 
Buppiyo upåsako bhegavantam etad avoca: edhivüsetu me 
bbante bhagavá svátan&ya bhattam seddbim bhikkhusam- 
ghená ’t.  edhivásesi bhagavå tunhibbåvena. atha kho 
Buppiyo upåsako bhagavato adhivásanam viditvå uttbåyåsanå 
bhagavantam abhivådetvå padakkhinam ksatvå pakkAmi. 
atha kho Suppiyo upåsako tasså rattiyå acoayena payitam 
kbådaniyam . bhojaniyam petiyådåpetvå bhagavato kålam 
Ёгосйреві : kalo bhante nitthitam bhattan ti. stha kho bha- 
gavå pubbanhasamayam nivåsetvå pattacivaram ådåya yena 


218 MAHÁVAGGA. . [YL 89. 6-10. 


Buppiyama semen nivesanam fen’ u “papkani, npe 


T" atha kho Suppiyo planke yens үт ten' upa- 
zamkami, upasamkamitvà bhagavantam abhivüdetvà ekam- 
antam atthås. ekamantam thitam kho Suppiyam upåsakam 
bhagavü etad avoca: kaham Suppiyå 'ti gilàn& bhagava 
'ti. tena hi Agacchatt "ti. na bhagavå ussabatiti. tena hi 
pariggsbetvåpi AnethA’ti. atha kho Suppiyo upåsako Suppi- 
yam upåsikam pariggahetvå Gnesi. tasså saha dassanena 
bhagavato tåvamahå vano rü]ho ahosi succhavi lomajåto. 
(16) atha kho Suppiyo ca upåssko Buppiyà са upásik& 
acchariyam vata bho abbhutam vata bho tathágatassa mahi- 
ddbikatå mehAnubhávetà, yatra hi ndma saha dassanena 
bhagavato tåvamahå vano rü]ho bhavissati succhavi loma- 
jåto ”ti hatthà udaggå buddhapamukham bhikkhusamgham 
paenitens khádaniyena bhojaniyena sahattbå santappetvå 
sampavåretvå bhegaventam bhuttávim onitapattapinim ekam- 
antam nisidimsu. athe kho bhagavà Suppiyam up&sakam 
Suppiyefi ca upåsikam dhammiyé kath&ya sandassetvà eamA- 
dapetvå samuttejetvå sampahamsetvà utthåyåsanå pakkAmi. 
171 atha kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne etasmim pakarane 
bhikkhusamgham sannipåtåpetvå bhikkhü patipucochi: ko 
bhikkhave Suppiyam upåsikam mamsam vififiApestti. evam 
vutte so bhikkhu bhagsvantam etad avoca: aham kho 
bhante Suppiyam upåsikam шакат vififiApesin ti. &hari- 
yittha bhikkhü "ti. &hariyittha bhagava ti. paribhufiji tvam 
bhikkhü 'ti. paribbufij’ dham bbagavå і. pativekkbi tvam 
bbikkbf ’ti пАһаш bhagavá pativekkhin ti. |811 vigarahi 
buddho bhagsvå: ketham hi nåms tvam moghapuriss appeti- 
vekkhitvå mamsam paribhufijissàsi, manussamamsam kho ta- 
yñ moghspurisa paribhuttam. n’ etam moghapurisa appa- 
eanndnam và pasádáya. vigsrahitvå dhammikatham katvé bhi- 
kkhf &mantesi: santi bhikkhave manusså saddhå pesanná, te- 
hi ettano pi mamsåni periccattåni. na bhikkhave manusea- 
mamsam paribhufijitabbam. уо paribhuüjeyya, Ара 
thullaccayassa. ne ca bhikkhave appativokkhitvé mam- 
sam peribhufijitebbam yo paribhuijeyye, épatti dukka- 
(аавд "ti. ||9]| tena kho pana samayena rañño hatthi ma- 


VL 29. 10-13.) MAHÅVAGGA. 219 


ranti. manosså dubbhikkhe hatthimamaam paribhufijanti, 
bhikkhünam pindåya carantånam hetthimamsam denti, bbi- 
kkhü hetthimamsam paribhuüjenti. manusså ujjháyanti 
khiyanti vipåcenti: katham hi náme samap& Sakyaputtiy& 
hatthimemaam paribhufüjissanti. rájangam hatthi, васе raja 
jüneyys, na nesam sttamsno asså 'ti, bbagavato etam attham 
árocesum. na bbikkhave hatthimamsam paribhufiji- 
tabbem. yo peribhuüjeyya, åpetti dukkatasså 'ti. 1/101 
tena kho pana samayens гаййо asså maranti. manusså 
dubbhikkhe assamamsam peribhufijanti, bbikkhånam pinda- 
ya carautånam assamamsam denti, bhikkhü assamamsam 
paribhufijanti. manusså ujjháyanti khiyanti vipAcenti : 

katham hi náma samanå Sakyaputtiyå assamamsam pari- 
bhufijissanti. rájengam asså, ance гаја jáneyye, na nesam 
attamano asså ti. bhagavato etam attham Årocesum. па 
bhikkhave assamamsam paribhufijitabbam. yo pari- 
bhuífjeyya, åpatti dakkatass4 'ti. 1111 tena kho pana 
samayens manusså dubbhikkhe sunakhamameam paribhufi- 
janti, bhikkhünam pindåys carantånafn sunekhamamsam 
denti, bhikkhü sunakhamamsam  paribhufjanti. manussd 
ujjbåyanti khiyanti vip&centi: katham hi ойша samaņå 
Bekysputtiyáà sunakhamamsam  peribhuüjissanti, jeguccho 
øunakho patikkülo 'ti. bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. 
ne bhikkhave sunakhamamsam paribhufijitebbam. 
yo peribhufjeyya, Apatti dukkatassé "ti. ||12|| tena kho 
pans samayena manusså dubbhikkhe ahimamsam paribbufi- 
jenti, bhikkhünam pipdåye carentànam ahimamsam denti, 
bhikkhü abimamsam paribhufijanti. manusså ujjháyanti 
khtyanti vipåcenti: katham hi n&ma samenå Sakyeputtiyå 
ahimamsam paribbufijissanti, jeguocho ahi patikkülo “ti 
Supasso pi någaråjå yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upa- 
samksmitvå bhagavantam abhivådetvå ekamantam atthási. 
ekamantam thito kho Supasso någaråjå bhagavantam etad 
&voca : santi bhante någå assaddhå appasannå, te appamattake 
pi bhikkhü vihetheyyam. sådhu bhante ayyå ahimamsam 
na paribhuüjeyyun ti. athe kho bhagavå Supessam någarå- 
jånam dhammiyà kathüys sandassesi — ls — padakkhi- 
pam katvå pakkémi. atha kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne 


920 | MAHÅVAGGA. [YL 88. 13-94. 3. 


dhammikatham kstvå bhikkhü Amantesi: na bhikkhave 
shimameam paribhufijitabbam. yo paribhufljeyya, 
Apatti dukkatasså ’ti. |13|| tena kho pana samayena luddakA 
siham hantvå mamsam peribhuffjanti, bhikkhünam Pindåya 
carantånam sihamamsam denti. bhikkhü sihamamsam pari- 
bhufjitvá arafifie viharanti, sibå sihamamsagandhena bhi- 
kkhü perip&tenti. bhagavato etam attham frocesum ne 
bhikkhave sihamamsam paribhufijitabbam. yo pari- 
bhufijeyya, åpatti dukkatasså "ti. 14] tena kho рапа sama- 
yena luddakå vyaggham hantvà, dipim hantv’, aocham 
hantvå, taraccham hantvå mamsam peribhufijanti, bhikkhü- 
nam pindáye carantánam tarecchamamsam denti. bhikkhà 
taracohamamsam paribhufijitvà arafifie viharsnti, taraochá 
taracchemamsagandhena bhikkhü paripåtenti. bhegavato 
etam attham årocesum. na bhikkhave taracchamamsam 
peribhufijitabbam. yo paribhufijeyya, &patti dukkatasså 
'ti 1151981 


atha kho bhagavá BarAnasiyam yathåbbirantam viha- 
ritvå yena Andhakavindam tena cårikam pakkAmi ma- 
hatâ bhikkhusamghena saddhim addhatelasehi bhikkhusatehi, 
tena kho pans samayena jånepadå manusså Баһир lopam pi te- 
lam pi tandulsm pi khedaniyam pi saketesu Åropetvå buddha- 
pamukhassa bhikkhusamghassa pittbito-pitthito anubeddhà 
honti yad& patipåtim labbissåme tadA bhettam kerisskmå "ti, 
pailcamattåni ca vighåsådasatåni. atha kho bhagavå anupu- 
bbena cårikam caremáno yena Andhakavindam tad avusari. 
lli athe kho afifistaresss bráhmanassa patipåtun alabhan- 
tassa etad ahosi: atitáni kho me dve mAsAni buddhapamukham 
bhikkhusamgham anubeddhassa yadá patipátim labhissámi 
tadå bhattam karissåmiti, na са me patipåti labbhati, аһай 
o amhi ekako, bahu ca me gbaråvåsattho háyati. yam 
nün&ham bhattaggam olokeyyam, yam bhattagge na addasam 
fam patiyádeyyen ti. atha kho so bråhmano bhattaggam 
olokento dve náddass yagufi са madhugojakafl ca. 1211 atha 
kho so brühmano yendyasmi Anando ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå Ayasmantam Anendam etad avoca: idha me 
bho Ananda patipåtim alabhantessa etad ahosi: atitàni kho 


YL 9%. 3-6.] MAHAVAGGA. 221 


me dve måsåni buddhapamukham bhikkhusamgham anuba- 
ddhassa yadà patipåtim labhissåmi tadå bhettam kariss&miti, 
na са me patipåti labbhati, ahafi с’ ambi ekako, bahu ca me 
gharåvåssttho háyati. yam обраћа bhattaggam olokeyyam, 
yam bhattegge na sddasam tam patiyddeyyan ti so kho 
eham bho Ananda bhattaggam olokento dve na addasam 
yågnå са madhugolakai ca. sac’ Aham bho Ananda pati- 
yådeyyam yåguå ca madhugoļakañ ca, patiganheyya me 
bhavam Gotamo 'ti. tena hi brahmeya bhagsvantam pu- 
cchissámiti. |3| atha kho &yasmá Anando bhagavato etam 
ettham årocesi tena h’ Ananda patiy&detü "ti, tena hi 
bråhmsna patiyådehiti. atha kho so bráhmano tasså rattiyå 
socayena pahütam yågufi ca madhugolakafi ca patiyådåpetvå 
bhagsvato upanåmesi: patigapbàtu me bhevam Gotamo 
yåguii ca madhngo]akaü сё "ti. tena hi bråhmans bhikkh0- 
nam debiti. bhikkhü kukkuoc&yantå na patiganbanti. pa- 
tiganhaths bhikkhave paribhufijathé 'ti. atha kho so bráh- 
mano buddhapamukham bhikkhusamgham pahitaya yåguyå 
са madhugolekena ca sshatthá eantappetva sampavåretvå 
bhagavantam dhotahattham onitapattapånim ekamantam ni- 
edi. |4|| ekamantam nisinnam kho tam bråbmanam bhaga- 
vå etad avoca: das’ ime brahmsns ånisamså yåguyå, katame 
dass. yagum dento åyum deti, vannam deti, sukham deti, ba- 
lam deti, patibhànam deti, yagu pitå khudam patihanati, pi- 
påsam vinodeti, våtam anulometi, vatthim sodheti, åmåvase- 
sam påceti. ime kho bråhmans dasånisam=å yåguyå ”ti. ||5[| 

yo safifiatånam paradattabhojinam kAlena sakkaccam dadåti 


. yagum 

das’ assa thånåni anuppavacchati: åyufi ca vanpaü ca 
sukham balafi ca,| 

patibhánam assa upájayati tato, khudam pipåsañ ca vyapa- 
neti våtam, 

sodheti vatthim, paripåmeti bhattam. bbessjjem etam 
sugatena vannitam.| 

tasmA hi yågum alam eva datum niccam manussena 
sukhattbikena 

dibbáni và pattbeyetA sukhåni manussasobhågystam iochatA 
vå 'ti. ||6 ll 


922 MAHÁYAGGA, [V. 96. 7-85. 4. 


atha kho bhagavá tam bráhmanam im&bi gåthåhi snumo- 
ditvà utth&y&sanà pekkåmi. atha kho bhagavá etasmim 
nidåne dhammikathem katvå bhikkhü Amantesi: anujånåmi 
bhikkhave yáguü oa madhugolakan of 'ti. 171241 


assosum kho manussá: bhagavatá kira yågu snuññata 
madhugolakafi cñ 'ti. te Кава’ eva bhojjayagum patiy&denti 
medhugolakafi са. bhikkhü kålass' eva bhojjayåguyå dbátà 
madhugo]ekena ca bhattagge na cittarüpam bhufljanti. tena 
kho pana eamayene aüilatarena tarupapasannena mahåmatte- 
na svátenüya buddhapamukho bhikkhusamgho nimantito 
hoti. atha kho tassa terupapasannasse mahámattassa etad 
ahosi: yam nün&áham eddhatelasannam bbikkbusstånam 
addbatelasåni merpsapåtisatåni patiy&deyyam ekamekaasa 
bhikkhuno ekamekam mamsapåtim upandmeyyan ti. ly 
atha kho so tarunapasanno mahümatto tasså rattiyå accayens 
panitam khadaniyam bhojeniyam patiyådåpetvå addhatela- 
eni ca mernsapåtisståni bhagavato kålam årocåpesi: kalo 
bhante, nitthitam bhattan ti. stha kho bhagavå pubbanha- 
samayam nivåsetvå pattactvaram ådåya yena tassa tarupape- 
sannassa mahåmattassa nivesanam ten’ upasamkami, upasam- 
kamitvå pafiflatte Asane nisidi saddhirn bbikkhusamghena. |20 
atha kho eo tarunapasanno mahámatto bhattagge bhikkhü pa- 
rivisati. bhikkhü evam åhamsu: thokam Avuso dehi ока 
Avuso debiti. må kho tumhe bhante ayam tarunapasanno ma- 
hAmatto 'ti thokam-thokam patiganhatha. bahum me kbådani- 
yam bhojaniyam patiyattam addhatelasåni са mamsapátieatA- 
ni, ekamekassa bhikkhuno ekamekam mamsapáütim upandme- 
ssimiti. patiganbatha bbante yåvadatthan ti. na kho mayam 
åvuso etamkárapá thokam-thokam patiganbåms, api са mayam 
kålass' eva bhojjayåguyå dhåtå madhugo]akena ca, tena mayam 
thokam-thokam patiganhåmå ’ti. 1311 stha kho so taranape- 
sanno mabåmatto ujjbåyati khiyeti vipåceti: katham hi 
nama bhaddantá mayá nimantitå аййавза bhojjayagum pa- 
ribhufijissanti, na cáham na patibalo yavadattham dåtun ti 
kupito anattamano fsådanåpekkho bhikkhünam patte pürento 
agamåsi bhuñjatha và harstha vë "ti. athe kho eo tarups- 
pasanno mahåmatto buddhapamukham bhikkhusamgham pa- 


VL 99. 4-7.) MAHAVAGGA. 223 


nitena khádaniyena bhojaniyena sahatth& santappetvá sampa- 
våretvå bhagavantam bhuttávim onitapattapånim ekamantam 
nisidi. ekamantam nisinnam kho terunapasannam mahå- 
mattam bhagavaé dhammiy& katháya sandassetvå samådapetvå 
samuttejetvà sampahamsetvå utthåyåsanå pakkåmi. ||4|| atha 
kho tassa tarunapasannassa mahåmettasss acirapakkantasas 
bhagavato ahud eva kukkuccam ahu vippatisåro: alübhà vata 
me, na vata me låbhå, dulladdham vata me, ne vata me su- 
laddham, yo ‘ham kupito anattsmano åsådanåpekkho bhi- 
kkhünam patte pürento agamåsim bhufijathe vå haratha và 
"1. kim nu kho mayå bahum pasütam puññam và apufiflam 
чё ’ti, atha kho so tarupspasanno mahåmatto yena bhagavå 
ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvà bhagavantam abhivádetvà 
ekamantam nisidi. ekamantam nisinno kho eo terunapa- 
sanno mahámatto bhagavantam etad avoca: idha mayham 
bhante acirspakkantassa bhagavato ahud eva kukkuccam 
ahu vippatisiro: alåbbå vata me, na vata me lábbá, dulla- 
ddham vata me, na vata me euladdham, yo ”bam kupito 
anattamano åsådanåpekkho bhikkhünam patte pårento aga- 
másim bhuñjatha vA heratha và 'tL kim nu kho mayá 
behum pesütam puññam ve apufiflam vå 'ti. kim nu kho 
may& bhante bahum pasütam риййаш vå apufiilam và "ti. ||5 || 
yadaggena tay& åvuso svåtanåya buddhapamokho bhikkhu- 
samgho nimantito, tadaggena te babum риййат past- 
tam, yadaggena te ekamekena bhikkbunå ekamekam si- 
ttham patiggahitam, tadaggena te bahum pufifiam pasů- 
tam, saggá te Åreddbå 'ti. atha kho so tarupapasanno 
mahåmatto låbbå kira.me, suladdham kira me, bahum kira 
mayå puññam pasütam, saggå kira me åraddhå 'ti hattho 
udaggo uttbåyåsanå bhagavantam abhivådetvå padakkhinam 
katvå pakkami. |6] atha kbo bhagavá etasmim nidåne 
etasmim pakarane bhikkbusamgham sannipåtåpetvå bbikkbå 
patipucchi: saccam kira bhikkhave bhikkhü afifiatra ni- 
mantitå aññassa bhojjeyågum peribhufljentiti. saccam bha- 
gavå. vigarahi buddho bhagavå: katbam hi nåma te bhi- 
kkhave moghapuriså afifiatra nimantitå afifiassa bhojjeyågum 
paribhufijissanti. п’ etam bhikkhave appasannåner và pa- 
sådåye. vigarahitvá dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü åmante- 


994 MAHÅVAGGA. (VI. 95. 7-98. 4. 


si: ne bhikkhave afiflatra nimantitena аййавва bho- 
jjeyågu paribhuüjitabbá. yo paribhuijeyya, yathå- 
dhammo káretabbo "ti. 171281 


atha kho bhagavå Andhakavinde ysthábhirantam vi- 
baritvå yena Råjegabam tena cárikam pakkAmi mahatá 
bhikkhusamghena saddhim addhatelasehi bbikkhusatehi. te- 
na kho pana samayens Belattho Keccáno Råjagehå 
Andhakavindem addhénamaggepatipanoo hoti pañca- 
mattehi sakatasatehi sabbeh' eva gu]akumbhapürehi. addasa 
kho bhagavå Belattham Kaccánam dårato 'va &gaccbantam, 
disvána maggá okkamma afifiatarasmim rukkhamile nisidi. 
Uli atha kho Belattho Kaccåno yena bhagavå ten’ upa- 
samkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivádetvà ekam- 
antam atthási. ekamantam thito kho Belattho Kaccáno 
bhagavantam etad avoca: icchám' sham bhante ekamekasss 
bhikkhuno ekamekam gulakumbham dåtun ti. tena hi tvam 
Kaccána ekam yeva gujakumbham åberå "ti. evam bhante 
‘ti kho Belattho Kaccáno bhagavato patieunitvá ekam yeva 
gulekumbham Adaya yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkemi, upa- 
samkamitvà bhagavantam etad avoca: åhato bhante gu]a- 
kumbho, kathåham bhante petipajjàmiti. tena hi tvam 
Kaccáns bbikkhünam guļam dehiti. |121 evam bhante 'ti 
kho Belattho Kaccino bhagavato patisunitvå bhikkhünam 
gulam datvå bhagevantam etad avoca: dinno bhante bhi- 
kkhünam роо bahu cáyam gulo avasittho, kathåham bhante 
petipajjmiti. tena hi tvam Kaccåna bhikkbünam gulam 
yåvadattham dehiti evam bhante 'ti kho Belattho Kaccáno 
bhagavato petisunitvå bhikkhünam guļam yåvadattham da- 
två bhagavantam etad avocs: dinno bhente bhikkhünam 
gulo yåvadattho bahu cåyam gu]o avasittho, kathåham bhante 
petipajjámiti. tense bi буташ Kaccåns bhikkhf gulehi santa- 
ppehiti. evam bhante 'ti kho Belattho Kaccáno bhagavato 
patisupitvà bhikkhü gu]ehi esntappesi. ekacee bhikkhü 
patte pi püresum perissivandni pi thavikåyo pi püresum. 11$] 
atha kho Belattho Kaccáno bhikkhü gu]ehi santappetvå bha- 
gavantam etad атосв: santappitå bbante bhikkhü gu]ehi babu 
cåyam gulo avasittho, kathAham bhante petipsjjåmiti. tena 


VI. 86. 4-8.] MAHÅVAGGA. 225 


Ы tvam Kaocána vighåsådånam gulam dehiti. evam bhante 
"ti kho Belattho Kaccåno bhagavato patisunitvå vighåsådå- 
nam gulam datvå bhagavantam etad avoca: linno bhante 
vighåsådånam gulo bahu cåyam gulo avasittho, ketbåham 
bhante patipajjámiti tena hi tvam Kaccána vighåsådånam 
y4vadattham gulam dehiti. ||4|| evam bhante ‘ti kho Be- 
lattho Kaceåno bhagavato patisupitva vighåsådånam yåvad- 
attham gujam datvé bhagavantam etad avoca: dinno bhante 
vighåsådånam gulo yåvedsttho bahu cáyam gulo avasittho, 
ketháham bhante patipajjámiti. tena hi tvam Kaccåna vi- 
ghásáde gulehi santappebiti. evam bhante 'ti kho Belattho 
Kaccåno bhagavato patisupitv& vigbåsåde gu]ehi santappesi. 
ekacce vighåsådå kolambe pi ghate pi påresum pitakåni pi 
ucohange pi påresum. ||b|| atha kho Belattho Kaecáno vi- 
ghåsde gu]ehi santappetvå bhagavantam etad avoca: santa- 
ppitá bhante vigbåsådå gulehi bahu cáyam gu]o avasittho, 
kathåham bhante patipajj&mili. n&ham tam Kaccåna passå- 
mi sadevake loke samårake sabrahmake sassamenabrihmani- 
y^ pajáys eadevamanussåya yessa so gu] paribhutto sammå 
perinámam geccheyya afiflatra tathågatassa vå tathågataså- 
vakessa vå tena hi tvam Kaccåna tam gulam appaharite vå 
chaddehi appåpake và udake opilápehiti, evam bhante 'ti 
kho Belattho Kaocáno bhagaveto patisupitvà tam gulam 
appånake udake opilåpesi. ||6|| atha kho so gujo udake pa- 
kkhitto cicoitáyati oiticitåyati samdhåpåyati sampadhåpåye- 
ti. seyyathåpi nama phålo divasam santatto udake pakkhitto 
ciccithyati citicitayati samdhüpáyati sampedhüpáyati, evam 
eva so gu]o udake pakkhitto ciccitáyati citicitåyati samdht- 
påyati sampadhüpáyati. atha kho Belnttho Kaocáno seam- 
viggo lomahatthajáto yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upa- 
samkamitvå bhagavantam sbhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi. ||7|| 
ekamantam nisinnassa kho Belatthassa Kaccánassa bhagavå 
anupubbikatham kathesi seyyath’ idam: dánakatham silake- 
tham saggakatham kåmånam &dinavam okåram aamkilesam 
nekkhemme ånisamsam pakåsesi. yada bhagavå afifidsi Be- 
lattbem Kaccánam kallacittam muducittam vinivaranacittam 
udaggacittam pasannacittam, atha yA buddhánam såmukkam- 
sikà dhammadesané tam pekásesi — 18 — evam eva Bela- 


VOL. ш. 16 


226 MAHÄVAGGA. [VI. 90. 6-22. 2 


tthasss Каосёпаава tammim yeva åsane virajam vitamalam 
dhammacakkhum udepádi yam kifici ssmudayadhammam 
sabbam tam nirodhadhammen ti. |1811 atha kho Belattho 
Kaccåno ditthadhammo pattadhammo viditadhammo pariyo- 
gálhadhammo tinnavicikiccho vigatakathamkatho vesárajja- 
ppatto aparappaocayo satthu såsane bhagavantam etad avoca: 
abhikkantam bhante, abhikkantam bhante, seyyathápi bhante 
nikkujjitam vå ukkujjeyys — la — evam eva bhagavatå ane- 
kapariyåyena dhammo pakåsito. ев’ Aham bhante bbaga- 
vantam saranam gacchámi dhammail ca bhikkhusamghafi ca, 
upåsakam mam và dhåretu ejjatagge pánupetam sara- 
nam gatan ti. 191261 


atha kho bhagavå anupubbena cårikam caramáno yena 
RAjagabam tad avasari. tatra eudam bhagavá Rájagahe 
viharati Veluvane Kalandakanivüpe. tena kho pana 
samayens Rájagahe gu|o ussanno hoti. bhikkhü gilánaas' 
eva bhagavatå gulo anufifiåto no agilAnasad 'ti kakkucca- 
yantå gulam na bhuüjanü. bhagavato etam attham åroce- 
sum.  &nuján&mi bhikkhave gilånasss gulam, agilànasss 
gulodakan ti. || 11271 


atha kho bhagavA Råjsgahe yathAbbirantam viharitvà 
yena Pátalig&mo tens cárikam реккёті mahatå bhikkhu- 
eamghena saddhim eddhatelasehi bhikkhueatehi atha kho 
bhagavå anupubbena cárikam caramåno yena Påtaligåmo 
tad avasari. assosum kho Påtaligåmikå upásská: bhagavå 
kira Påtaligåmam anuppetto 'ti. аа kho Påtaligåmikå 
upåsakå yens bhagavå ten’ upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitva 
bhageventam ebhivådetvå ekamantam nietdimsu, ekamantam 
nisinne kho Påtaligåmike upåsake bbagavå dhemmiy& ka- 
tbåye aandassesi samådapesi samuttejesi sampahameesi. [1|| 
atha kho Pátaligámiká upåsakå bhagavatá dbammiyå katha- 
ya sandassitå sam&dapità samuttejitå sampebamsitå bhaga- 
vantam etad avocum : adhivüsetu no bhante bhagavå åvasn- 
thågåram saddbim bhikkhusamghená 'ti. adhivásesi bhagava 
tunhibbåvens. atha kho Påtaligåmikå upåsakå bhagevato 
adhivåsanam viditvå utthåyåsanå bhagavantam sbhivådetvå 


VI. 98. 2-6.] MAHAVAGGA. 227 


padakkhinam katvå yena åvesathågåram ten’ upasamkamim- 
su, upasamkamitvå sabbesantharim santhatam AvasathAgfram 
santharitvå åsanåni раййёреётё udakamanikam patitthåpetvå 
telapadipam åropetvå yens bhagavå ten’ upasamkemimsu, 
upasamkamitvà bhegavantam abhivådetvå ekamantam 
atthamsu. 12| ekamantam thitá kho Påtaligåmikå up&aaká 
bhagavantam etad avocum: sabbasantharim santhatam bhante 
Avasathágáram, üsanáni pefinattáni, udakamaniko patitthápi- 
to, telapadipo &ropito, yassa dani bhante bbsgavá Кат 
maññatiti. atha kho bhagavå pubbanhasamayam nivåsetvå 
pettacivaram ådåye saddhim bhikkhusamghene yena ávesa- 
thågåram ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvà pide pakkhå- 
letvå åvasathågåram pavisitva majjhimam thambham noissåya 
puratthimabbimukho nisidi. bhikkhusamgbo pi kbo pide 
pakkbåletvå åvassthågåram pavisitvå pacchimam bhittim . 
nissåya puraithimübhimukho nisidi bhagavantam yeve pura- 
kkhatvå. Påtaligåmikåpi kho upåsskå раде pakkhåletvå 
Avamathügáram pevisitvå puratthimam bhittim nissåya pa- 
cobimábhimukhá nisidimsu bhagavantam yeva purakkha- 
två. 1811 

atha kho bhagavå Påtaligåmike upásske Amantesi : paño’ 
ime gahapatayo ådinevå dussilassa silavipattiyå. ketame 
pañca. idha gahapatayo dussilo silavipanno pamådådbikara- 
qam mahatim bbogsjånim nigacchati, ayam pathamo ådinavo 
duesailassa eilavipattiya. puna ca param gabapatayo duesi- 
lassa eilavipannassa pápako kittisaddo abbhuggacchati, ayam 
dutiyo ådinevo dussilassa silavipattiya. pune са param ga- 
hapetayo dussilo silavipanno уай йай eva parisam upesamka- 
mati yadi khattiyaperisam yadi bråhmanaparisam yadi gaba- 
patiparisam yadi samaņaparisam avisirado upasamkamati 
mañkubhůto, ayam tatiyo ådînavo dussilassa silavipattiyá. 
puna са param gahapatayo било silavipsnno sammålbo 
kálam karoti, ayam catuttho Adinavo dussilassa sîlavipattiyå. 
puns ca param gabepatayo dussilo silavipanno kayassa bhedå 
param marspå apåyam duggatim vinipAtam nirayam upa- 
pajjati, ayam paficamo Adinavo dussilassa silavipattiyå. ime 
kho gahapatayo paños ådinavå dussilasse silavipattiy&. ||4 || 

paño’ ime gahspatayo ånisamså silavato silasampadáya. 


228 MAHÅVAGGA. [VI. 28. 5-6. 


katame райса. idhe gahapatayo silavå silasampanno appa- 
mådådhikaranam mahantam bhogakkhandham adhigacchati, 
ayam pathamo Anisamso sílavato eilasampadáya. ропа ca 
param gahapatayo silavato stlasampannassa kalyåno kittisaddo 
abbhuggacchati, ayam dutiyo ånisamso silavato etlasampada- 
ys. puna ca param gahapatayo eilavà silasampanno уай fad 
eva parisam upasamkamati yadi kbattiyaparisam yadi bràh- 
manaparisam yadi gabapatiparisam yadi samanaperisam viså- 
rado upssapkamati amankubhüto, syam tatiyo Anisamso aî- 
lavato silasampadüya. puna ca peram gabapatayo stlavå 
silasampanno asammü]|ho kálam karoti, «yam catuttho &ni- 
samso eilavato silssampadåye. puna ca param gahapatayo 
silavà eilessmpanno kåyassa bhedå param marapá sugatim 
saggam lokam upapajjati, ayam paficamo ånisamso eilavato 
silasampadáys. ime kho gahapatayo райса Anisamså silevato 
etlasampadaya "ti. ||5 I 

atha kho bhagavå Påtaligåmike upåsake bahud eva rattim 
dhammiyå kstháya saudassetvå samådapetvå samuttejetvå 
sampahamsetvå uyyojesi: abbikkantå kho gahapatayo ratti, 
yassa dani kålam mafiñathå ‘ti. evam bhante 'ti kho Patali- 
gåmikå upásaká bhagavato patisunitvA utth&áyásanà bbaga- 
vantam abhivådetvå padakkhinam katvå pakkamimeu. [6] 

atha kho bbegsvå acirepakkantesu Påtaligåmikesu upása- 
kesu sufifiågåram pávisi. tena kho pana samayena Suni- 
dhavassakárá Magadbamahámattà Påtaligåme na- 
geram måpenti Vajjinam petibåhåya. addasa kho bhagavå 
rattiyå paccüsasamayam paccutthåya dibbena cakkhunA vi- 
suddhena atikkentamünusakena sambahulå devatåyo Pátali- 
gåme vatthOni pariganhantiyo. yasmim padese mahesakkhå 
devatå vatthüni pariganhanti, mahesakkh&nam tattba råjå- 
nam råjamabåmettånam cittåni namanti nivesan&ni måpetum, 
yasmim padese msjjbimå devatà vatthüni periganhenti, 
majjhimünam tatthe råjOoam råjamebåmattånem cittåni na- 
manti nivesanåni måpetum, yasmim padese піса devatå 
vatthüni pariganhanti, nicdnam tattha rájünam råjamabå- 
mattånam cittåni namanti nivesanåni måpetum. ||7| athe 
kho bhagavå &yasmautam Ånandem åmantesi: ke nu kho 
te Ananda Påtaligåme nagaram måpentiti. Bunidhavassaká- 


VI. $3. 8-11.} MAHÅVAGGA. 229 


rå bhante Magadhamshåmettå Påtuligåme nagaram måpenti 
Vajjinam patibåhåyå 'ti. seyyathüpi Ananda devehi Táva- 
timeehi saddhim mantetvå evam eva kho Ananda Sunidhe- 
vassakårå Magsdhemehåmattå Påtaligåme nagsram måpenti 
Vajjinam patibàháya. idbåham Ananda rattiyå paccüsasam- 
ayam paccuttbåya addasam dibbena cakkbunå visuddhena 
&tikkantamánusakena sambahulå devatåyo . . . nícánam 
tatthe rájünam råjemebåmettånam cittåni namanti nivesanå- 
ni måpetum. yåvatå Anande ariyam åyatanam yåvstå va- 
nippatho idam agganegaram bhavissati Påtaliputtam puta- 
bhedanam. Påtaliputtassa kho Ananda tayo antaråyå bha- 
vissanti, aggito và udakato và abbhantarato và mithubhedà 
^i. 180 
atha kho Sunidhavassakårå Magadbamabåmattå yena bha- 

gavå ten’ upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitvé bhagavatá sa- 
ddhim sammodimsu, sammodaniyam katham såraniyam viti- 
eåretvå ekamantam atthamsu, ekamantam thité kho Sunidha- 
vamsakårå МарайһашаһашаНА bhagavantam etad avocum : 
adhivdsetu no bhavam Gotamo ajjatanåye bhattam saddhim 
bhikkhusamghená 'ti. adhivåsesi bhagavå tunhibbåvens. 
atha kho Sunidhavassakárá Magadbamabåmattå bhagavato 
adhivåsanam viditvå pakkamimsu. ||9|| atha kho Sunidha- 
vassskårå Magadhamshåmattå panitam khádaniyam bhojeni- 
yam petiyådåpetvå bhagavato kålam ürocápesum: kalo bho 
Gotama, nitthitam bhattan ti. atha kho bhagavå pubbanha- 
samayam nivåsetvå pattacivaram &dáya yena Sunidhavaasa- 
kârânam Magadbamahåmettånam perivesanå ten’ upasamka- 
mi, upssamkamitvå pefifiatte Asane nisidi esddhim bhikkhu- 
samghens. atha kho Sunidhavassakårå Magadhamshámattà 
buddhepamukham bhikkhusamgham panitene kbådsuiyens 
bhojaniyena sahatthá santappetvå sampavåretvå bhagavantam 
bhuttåvim onitapattapánim ekamantam nisidimsu, ekaman- 
tam nisinne kho Sunidhavassakire Magadhamahámatte bha- 
gavå imáhi gåthåbi anumodi : [110]] 

yasmim padese kappeti våsam panditajatiyo, 

silavantettha bhojetvå saññate brahmacariye | 

yå tattha devatå åsum tåsam dakkhinam ådiee, 

tå påjitå püjayanti, månitå mánayanti пат, | 


230 MAHAVAGGA. [VL $9. 11-39. 2. 


tato nam anukempenti måtå puttam va orasam. 
devatånukampito poso sadå bhadrAni passatiti. 


atha kho bhagav& Sunidhevassakåre Magadhamab&matte 
imáhi gåthåbi enumoditv& utthåyåsanå pakkåmi. [11] tena 
kho pana samayens Sunidhavaseakårå Magadhamahåmettå 
bhagavantam pitthito-pitthito anubaddhå honti, yen’ ajja ea- 
mano Gotamo dvårens nikkhamiesati tam Gotamadváram 
néme bhevissati, yena titthena Gaigem nadim uttarissati 
tam Gotamatittham nåms bhavissatiti. atha kho bhaga- 
vå yena dvárena nikkhami tam Gotamadvåram nåma ahosi. 
atha kho bhagavå yena Gaügá nadi ten’ upasamkami. tena 
kho pana samayena Ganga nadt pårå hoti samatitthiké k&ka- 
peyyå. manueså aññe nåvam pariyesanti аййе ujumpam 
pariyesanti аййе kullam bandhanti orå påram gantukåmå. 
11211 addass kho bhagavå te manusse aññe nåvam pariye- 
sante afifie ulumpam pariyesante afifle kullam bandhante ога 
param gantukåme, disvåna seyyathapi nama balavå puriso 
sammilljitam và båham разАгеууа pasåritam vå báham samm- 
ifijeyya, evam eva Gengáya nadiyå orimatire antarahito på- 
rimatire paccutth4ai saddhim bbikkbusamghens. eths kho 
bhagevå etam attham viditvå tåyam velåyam imam udánam 
udånesi : 


ye taranti annavam saram setum katvána vissajja pallaláni, 
kullam hi jano bendhati, tinnd medhåvino janå ti. [131284 


atho kho bhagavå yena Kotigåmo ten’ upasamkami. tatra 
sudam bbagevà Kotigåme viharati. tatra kho bhagavå 
bhikkhå &mantesi: catunnam bhikkhave ariyasaccánam an- 
enubodhá appetivedhå evam idam digham addhánem sandbå- 
vitam eamsaritam шашай c’ eva tumhákafi ca. katamesam 
eatunnam.  dukkhasss bhikkhave ariyassocasss ananubodhå 
appativedbå evam idam digham addhánam sandhåvitam eam- 
saritam шашай c' eva tumbakafi са. dukkhasamudayasss ari- 
yasaccassa, dukkhanirodhassa ariyasaocassa, dukkhanirodha- 
güminipatipadáariyasaccassa avenubodbå appetivedhá evam 
idam digham addhánam sandhávitam samsaritam шашай o" 
eva tumhñkañ ca. |11 tayidam bhikkhave dukkham ariya- 


VI. 99. 2-90. 3.] MAHÁVAGGA. 231 


eaccam anubuddham patividdham, dukkhasamudayam ariya- 
eaccam anubuddham petividdham, dukkhanirodham ariya- 
saccam anubuddham patividdham, dukkhanirodhagámint pa- 
petipadá ariyasaccam anubuddham pstividdham, ucohinná 
bhavatanhá, КЫА bhavanetti, n’ atthi dáni punabbhavo "ti. 
catunnam ariyasaccánam yatháübhütam adassand 
samsitam digham addbånam tåsu-tåsv eva jatiau.| 
{Ап etåni ditthåni, bhavanetti samûhatå, : 
ucehinnam milam dukkhasss, п’ etthi dáni punabbhavo 
"і. 121291 


assosi kho Ambapåli ganikå: bhagavá kira Kotigå- 
mam anuppatto 'ti. atha kho Ambapáli ganikå bhadráni 
-bhadråni yånåni yojåpetvå bhadram yånam abhirühitvà 
bhadrehi-bhadrehi yånebi Vesáliy& niyyåsi bhagavantam 
dassanåya. yåvatikå yánassa bhimi уйпепа gantvå yånå 
peccorohitvé pattikå "va yena bbagevå ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivádetvà ekamantam nisidi. 
Will ekamantam nisinnam kho Ambapålim ganikam bha- 
gavå dhammiyå kathüya sandassosi samüdapesi samuttejesi 
sampahamsesi. atha kho Ambapali ganik& bhagavatá dha- 
mwiyå katbüya sandessitå semådapitå eamuttejità sampa- 
hamsitå bhagavantam etad avoca: adhivåsetu me bhante 
bhagavå svåtanåya bhattam saddhim bhikkhusamghenå "ti. 
adhivasesi bhagavå tunbibbåvene. atha kho Ambapåli gani- 
kA bhagavato adhivåsanam viditvå utthåyåsanå bhagavantam 
abhivådetvå padakkhinam katvå pakk&mi. 121 assosum kho 
Vesålikå Licchavi: bhagavé kira Kotigåmam anuppatto 
‘ti. atha kho Vesålikå Licchavi bhadråni-bhedråni y&nüni 
yojåpetvå bhadram-bhedram yånam abhirühitvà bhadrehi 
-bhadrehi yånehi Vesåliyå niyyåsum bhagaventam dassanáya. 
eppekacoe Licchavi nilå honti ilavannå nilavatthé nil&lam- 
kårå, appekacoe Licchavi pitá honti pitavannå pitavatthá pt- 
tålamkårå, appekaooe Liochavi lohitakå honti lohitsvannå 
lohitavatthå lohitålamkårå, appekacce Licohavt! odåtå honti 
odåtavannå odátavatthà odåtålamkårå. atha kho Ambepáli 
ganikå daheránam-daharánam Licchavinam fsåye team yuge- 
na yugam cakkena cakkam akkhens akkham pativattesi. |1911 


232 MAHÅVAGGA. [71. 30. 4-6. 


atha kho te Licchavi Ambapålim ganikam etad avocum : 
kissa je Ambapåli daharånam-dabarånam Licchavinam feåya 
feam yugens yugam cakkena cakkam akkhena akkham 
pativattesiti. (аа hi pana mayá syyaputté svütan&ya 
buddhapamukho bhikkhusamgho nimantito ’ti dehi je 
Ambapåli ambåkam etam bhattam satasshassená ’ti. sace pi 
ayyaputtå Vesilim såhåram dajjeyyåtha, n’ eva dajjdham 
tam bhattan ti. atha kho te Licchavt anguli pothesum : 
jit’ amh& vata bho ambakáye, par&ji' emhå vata bho 
ambakåyå ‘ti. 141 atha kho te Licchavi yena bhagavà 
ten’ upasamkamimsu. addasa kho bhagavá te Licchevi dù- 
rato ”va Agacchante, disvána bhikkhü &mantesi: yehi bhi- 
kkhave bhikkhühi devå Tåvatimså aditthapubbå, oloketha 
bhikkhave Liochaviparisam apaloketha bhikkhave Liochavi- 
parisam upasamharatha bhikkhave Licchaviparisam Távatim- 
saparisan ti. atha kho te Licchavi yåvatikå ydnasaa bhümi 
yånena gantvå yånå peccorohitv& pattikå "va yena bhagavå 
ten” upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitvå bhegavantam abbivå- 
detvå ekamantam nisidimsu. ekamantam nisinne kho te 
Liochavi bbagavå dhammiyá kathüya sandassesi samAdapeni 
eamuttejesi sampahamseai. atha kho te Lioohavi bhagavatà 
dhammiy& kutbåya ssndasaità samådepitå samuttejitå sampa- 
hamsitå bhagavantam etad avocum: sdbivåsetu no bhante 
bhagavå svåtanåya bhattam saddhim bhikkhusamghená "ti. 
adhivuttho 'mhi Licchavi evåtanåya Ambepåliyå gunikåye 
bhattan ti atha kho te Liochavi anguli pothesum: jit’ 
amhé vata kho ambakåye, paråjit' ambå vata bho ambakAyé 
"ti. atha kho te Licchavi bhagavato bhåsitam abhinanditvà 
anumoditvå utthåyåsanå bhagavantam abbivådetvå padakkhi- 
nam katvå pakkamimsu. ||5|| atha kho bhagavå Kotigåme 
yathåbhirentam viberitvå yena Nåtikå ten’ upssmkami. 
tetra видат bhagavé Nátike viherati Gifljakåvasathe. 
atha kho Ambepåli ganikå taseå rattiyå accayena sake Aråme 
panitam kh&daniyam bhojaniyem petiy&dápetvà bhegavato 
kålam &rocApem: kalo bhante, nitthitam bhattan ti. atha 
kho bhagavå pubbanhasamayam nivásetvá pattacivaram AdA- 
уз yena Ambapåliyå ganikAya parivessn& ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvá pafifiatte sane nisidi saddbim bhikkhu- 


VI. 80. 6-31. 3.) MAHAVAGGA. 233 


samghena. atha kho Ambapålt ganikA buddhapamukham 
bhikkhusamgham panitena khadaniyene bhojeniyena saha- 
tth& santappetvå sampavåretvå bhagevantam bhuttávim oni- 
tapattspånim ekamantam nisidi. ekamantam nisinná kho 
Ambepáli ganikå bhagavantam etad avoca: im&harn bhante 
Ambapálivanam buddhapemukhassa ‘bhikkhusamgheasa 
dammiti. patiggahesi bhagavå Åråmem. atha kho bhagava 
Ambapålim ganikam dhammiyå kathiya sandassetvå . . . 
sampehamsetvå uttbåyåsanå yena Mabåvanam ten’ upa- 
samkami. tatra sudam bbagavå Vesåliyam vihareti Ma- 
håvane Küt&ágárasálüáyam. 161301 
Licchavibhánaváram nitthitam. 


tena kho репа samayens abbifü&tà-abhiniüàtà Licchavt 
santhágáre sannisinná sanüipatità anekapariy&yena buddhassa 
vannam bbåsanti, dhammasss vannam bhåsanti, samghassa 
vannam bhåsanti. tena kho pana samayena Biho senåpati 
niganthasåvako tassam parisåyam nisinno hoti. atha kho 
Bihasss senápatissa etad sahosi: nissamssyam kho so bhugavà 
araham sammåsambuddho bhavissati, tatbå h’ ime abhififiata 
-abhiüüá&tà Licchavi santbågåre sannisinná eannipatità aneka- 
регіудуепв buddhasss vapnam bhásanti, dhammassa vannam 
bhásanti, samghassa vanpam bhêsanti yam nün&ham tam 
bhagavantam dassanáya upasamkemeyyam arahantam ва- 
mmåsambuddhan ti. | atha kho Siho senåpati yena nigantho 
Nátaputto ten’ upasamkemi, upesamkamitvå nigentham 
Nåtaputtam etad avoca: iccbám' aham bhante samanam 
Gotamam dassanáya upasamkamitun ti. kim pane {уаш 
Siha kiriyavådo samåno skiriyavådam samapam Gotamam 
dassanåya upasamkamissasi. samano hi Siha Gotamo ekiri- 
yavådo akiriyåye dhammam deseti tena ca eåvake vinetiti. 
atha kho Sihasss senåpatisss yo ahosi gamikåbhisamkhåro 
bhagavantam dassanåye so patippassambhi. |121! dutiyam рі 
kho abhififidtd-abhifinaté Licchavi santhågåre sannisinnå 
sannipatità anekapariyåyens buddhassa терда bbåsanti, 
dhammasss vappam bhåsanti, samghassa vannam bhásanti. 
dutiyam pi kho Sihasaa senápatiasa etad shosi: nissamssyam 
. .. sammåsambuddhen ti. dutiyam pi kho Siho sen&pati 


934 MAHÅVAGGA. (VI. 31. 3-8. 


yena nigantho Nataputto . . . vineti. dutiyam pi kho St- 
hassa senåpatises . . . patippassambhi. tatiyam pi kho 
abhiniAtà .. . тарпа bhásanti tatiyam pi kho Sihama 
senápatissa etad ahosi: nissamsayam . . . samghassa vanpam 
bhåsanti. kim hi me karissanti nigantbå epalokité vå an- 
apalokitå vå. yam nånåham anspaloketvå ”va niganthe tam 
bhagavantam dassanåya upasarmkamey yam arahantam sammá- 
sambuddhan ti. |3] atha kho Sibo senåpati paficahi ratha- 
satehi divådivassa Vesåliyå niyydai bhagavantam dassanå- 
ya. yávatikà yånassa bhümi yånena gantvå уйпа paccoro- 
hitvå pattiko ’va yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamka- 
mitvå bhagavantam abhivådetvå ekamantam nistdi. ekam- 
antam nisinno kho Siho senåpati bhagavantam etad avoca : 
sutam metam bhante: akiriyavådo samano Gotamo, aliriy&ya 
dhammam deseti tena ca såvake vinetiti. ye te bhante evam 
&hamsu : akiriyavádo samano Gotamo, akiriyAya dhammam 
deseti tena ca såvake vinetiti, kaooi te bhante bhagavato 
vuttsvàdi ns ca bhagavantam abhitena abbhücikkhanti 
dbammassa ca anudhammam vy&karonti. na ca koci saha- 
dhammiko vådånuvådo gårayhatthånam &gsochati, anabbha- 
kkhAtukéma hi mayam bhante bhagavantan ti. || 4]| 
atthi Siha pariyåyo yena mam pariyåyena eammá vadamå- 
no vadeyya: akiriyavüdo samapo Gotamo, akiriyåys dha- 
mmam deseti tena ca såvake vinetiti. atthi Stha pariyåyo yena 
mam pariyåyena sammå vadamåno vadeyya: kiriyavådo sa- 
mano Gotamo, kiriyåye . . . vinetiti. atthi Siha periyåyo 
yena mam . . . vadeyya: ucchedavådo samano Gotamo, 
ucchedáya . . . vinetiti. atthi Siba pariyåyo yena mam 
. vadeyya: jeguccht samano Gotamo, jegucchitéya . . . 
vinetiti. еб Stha periyáyo yens mam . .. vadeyys: ve- 
nayiko samano Gotamo, vinayüya . . . vinetiti. atthi Stha 
pariyåyo уепа mam . . . vadeyya: tapassi samano Gotamo, 
tapassitàya . . . vinetiti.  atthi Siha periyåyo yena mam 
. . vadeyys: apegabbho samano Gotamo, apagabbhetåya 
. . vinetiti. atthi Siha рагіудуо yena mam . . . vadeyya: 
assattho samano Gotamo, assåsåys . . . vinetiti. |b]| kata- 
mo ca Stha pariy&yo yena mam рагіуйуєпа sammå vadamáno 
vedeyya: akiriyavàdo samano Gotamo, akiriyåya dhammam 


VI. 81. 6-8.J MAHAVAGGA. 235 


deseti tena cs sávake vinetiti. abam hi Siha akiriyam vadå- 
mi kayaduccaritassa vaolduccaritaasa manoduccaritassa ane- 
kavihitånam рёрекёпат akusa&lánam dhammánam akiriyam 
vadåmi. ayam kho Siha periyáyo yena mam . . . vadeyya: 
akiriyavado eamano Gotamo, akiriyáya . . . vinetiti, kata- 
mo cs Siha pariyåyo yena mam . . . vadeyya: kiriyavådo 
samano Gotamo, kiriyåya . . . vinetiti. aham Ы Siha kiri- 
yam vadåmi kåyasucaritassa vacisucaritasss manosucaritassa 
anekavihitinam kusalånam dhammånam kiriyam vadåmi. 
ayam kho Stha pariyåyo yena mam . . . vadeyya: kiriyavå- 
do samano Gotamo, kiriyåys . . . vinetiti. [6] katamo ca 
Stha pariyåyo yena mam . . . vadeyya: ucchedavådo sama- 
no Gotamo, ucchedåya . . . vinetiti. sham bi Siha ucche- 
dam vadémi гёдвлва dosassa mohassa anekevihitånam påpa- 
kAnam skusslånam dhammånam ucchedam vedåmi. ayam 
kho Siha pariyåyo yena mam . . . vadeyya: ucohedavádo 
eamano Gotamo, ucohedåys . . . vinetiti. katamo ca Biha 
pariyåyo yens mam . . . vadeyya: jegucoht samano Gotamo, 
jegucchitéya . . . vinetiti. aham hi Siha jigucchámi kåya- 
duccaritena vactduccaritens manoduccaritena anekavihitànam 
påpakånem ekusalånam dhammánam samåpattiyl jegucchita- 
ya dhammam desemi. ayam kho Siha pariyåyo yena mam 
++» Vadeyya: jegucohi samano Gotamo, jegucchitåya . . . 
vinetiti. |7|| ketamo ca Біће pariyåyo yena mam . . . va- 
deyya: venayiko ssmano Gotamo, vinsyåye . . . vinetiti. 
aham hi Siha vinayáya dhammam desemi rügassa dosassa mo- 
hassa enekavihitànam püpekánam akusalánam dhammánam 
vinayAya dhammam desemi, ayam kho Siba pariyåyo yena 
шаш .. . vadeyya: venayiko samapo Gotamo, vineyfya 

+ vinetiti. katamo ca Stha pariyåyo yens mam . . . va- 
deyya: tapasst samano Gotamo, tapassitáya . . . vinetiti. 
tapanty’ Aham Siha påpake akusale dhamme vadåmi kåya- 
duccaritam vaciduccaritam manoduccaritam. yassa kho Siha 
tapanfyå påpakå akusalå dhammå pabtnå ucchinnsmilå tå- 
Iá vatthukatå anabhávam katå åystim anuppådadhemmå tam 
aham tapassiti vadAmi. tathågatassa kho Siha tapanty& på- 
paká akusalå dhammå . . . anuppådedhemmå. ayam kho 
Biha pariyåyo yena mam . .. vadeyya: tapas! samano 


936 MAHAVAGGA. [YL 81. 8-11. 


Gotamo, tapessitáye . . . vinetfti. |811 katamo ca Biha pa- 
riyåyo yena mam . . . vadeyya: apagabbho samano Gotamo, 
apagabbhatåys . .. vinetfti yasss kho Stha &yatim gabbhu- 
seyyà punabbbavåbhinibbetti pahinå ucchinnemülá télé va- 
tthukatá anabhávam katå åyatim anupp&dadhammá, tam 
sham apagabbho "і vadåmi. tatbågatasss kho Siha åyetim 
gabbhaseyyå . . . snuppådadbammå. ayam kho Siha pari- 
yåyo yens mam . . . vadeyya: apagabbho samano Gotamo, 
&pagabbhatàys . . . vinetiti. katamo ca Siba periyåyo yens 
mam ... vadeyya: assattho samano Gotamo, assáshya . . . 
vinettti. abam hi Siha assattho paramena ass&sena assåsåya 
ca dhammam desemi tena са såvake vinemi. ayam kho Siha 
pariyåyo yena mam . . . vadeyya: assattho samano Gotamo, 
assåsåya dhammam deseti tena ca såvake vinettti. |19] evam 
vutte Siho senåpati bhagavantam etad avoca: abhikkentam 
bhante — la — upásakam mam bhagavá dhåretu ajjatagge 
pånupetam saranam gatan ti. anuvijjekáram kho Sths karo- 
hi, anuvijjakáro tumkådisånam fiátamanussánam sådhu hott- 
ti. imin& р’ ham bhante bhagavato bbiyyosomattåye atta- 
mano abbiraddho yam mam bhagavå evam Aha: anuvijjakå- 
ram kho Stha karobi,anuvijjekåro tumhådisånam ñåtamanusså- 
nam eådhu hotiti. mamam hi bbante afifiatittbiyå såvakam 
labhitvå kevalakappam Vesålim patåkam parihareyyum Siho 
amb&kem senåpati sÁvakettam upagato "ti. athe cs pana 
mam bhagevå evam Aha: anuvijjakåram kho Siha karohi, 
anuvijjakåro tumhådisånam ñátamanussánam sådhu hotiti. 
es’ Gham bbante dutiyam pi bhagsvantam saranam gaochümi 
dhemmaü ca bhikkhusamghafi ca, upàsakam mam bhagavà 
dhåretu ajjatagge panupetam saranam gaten ti. ||10|| digha- 
rattam kho te Biba niganthánam opåvabhåtam kulam yena 
nesam upagatånam pindapåtam dåtabbam mafifieyyåsiu. 
iminå p’ åham bhante bhagavato bhiyyosomsttåya attamano 
abbiraddho yam mam bbagavá evam abs: digharattam kho 
te Siha nigantbånam opánabhütam kulam yena nesam upa- 
gatånam pindapåtam dåtabbam mafiñeyyåsiti. sutam metam 
bhante: samano Gotamo evam åhs: mayham eva dånam 
databbam, ne aññosam dånam dåtabbam, mayham eva sive- 
kånam dånam dåtabbam, na aflåesam såvakånam dánam då- 


VI. 31. 11-14.] MAHÅVAGGA. 997 


tabbam, mayham eva dinnam mahapphalam, na afifiesam 
dinnam mahapphalam, mayhem eva såvakånam dinnam ma- 
bapphalam, na aüfiesam såvakånem dinnam mabapphalan ti. 
atha ca pana mam bhagavá niganthesu pi dane samådapeti. 
api са bhante mayam ettha kålam jånissåma. еа’ Aham 
bhante tatiyam pi bhagavantam saranam gacobåmi . . . sa- 
ranam gatan ti. |11] atha kho bhagavå Bihassa senåpatissa 
anupubbikatham kathesi seyyath’ idam: dånakatham — la — 
aparappaccayo eatthu såsane bhagaventam etad avoca: 
adhivåsetu me bbante bhagavà svåtanåya bhattam sa- 
ddhim bhikkhusamghená "ti. adhivásesi bhagavå tupbibhå- 
vena, atha kho Siho senåpati bhagavato adhivåsanam vi- 
ditvå utthåyåsanå bhagavantam abhivådetvå padakkhinam 
katvå pakkámi. atha kho Siho senápati efifiataram purisam 
Anåpesi : gaccha bhane pavattamameam ján&hiti. atha kho 
Biho senåpati tasså rattiyå accayena panitam khádaniyam 
bhojaniyam patiyådåpetvå bhagavato kålam årocåpesi: kålo 
bhante, nitthitam bhattan ti. atha kho bbagavå pubbanha- 
eamayam nivåsetvå pattacivaram ådåya yena Sihassa senåpe- 
бева nivesanam ten’ upasamkami, upesamkamitvá pafifiatte 
åsane nisidi saddhim bhikkhusamghena. J 12 tena kho 
pana вашауепе sambahulå nigantbå Veeiliyam rethiydya 
rethiyam sifighåtakena singbåtakam båbå paggayba kandan- 
ti: ajja Sibena senåpatinå thullam passum vadhitvà eama- 
passa Gotamasea bhattam katam, tam samano Gotamo jånam 
uddissskatam mamsam paribhufljeti paticcakamman ti. atha 
kho аййаїаго рогіво yens Biho senåpati ten’ upasakam- 
mi, upasamkamitvå Sihassa senüpatissa upakennake Arocesi : 
yagghe bhante jåneyyåsi, ete sambahulå niganthd Vesåliyam 
rathiyåya rethiyam singh&takena siighåtakam båbå paggay- 
ba kandenti: ejja . . . uddissakatam mamsam paribhufijati 
paticcakemman ti slam syyo digharattam pi te hyasmantá 
avannakåmå buddhassa avannakåmå dhammassa avannakAmdé 
eamgbesss, nå са pana te Åyasmantå jiranti tam bhagavantam 
aeat& tucchA musá "va abhütena sbbbåcikkhantå, na ca ma- 
yam jlvitshetu pi вайсїсса рарат jivitå voropeyyåmå "ti. 
1131 athe kho Stho sepåpati buddhapsmukbam bbikkhu- 
samghem panitena khádaniyena bhojeniyena sahatthå santa- 


938 MAHÁVAGGA, [YL 3L 14-88. 1. 


ppetvå aampavåretvå bhagavantam bhuttåvim onitspattapå- 
рип ekamantam nisidi, ekamantam nisinnam kho Siham 
senåpetim bhagavà dbammiyå kathåye sandameetvà . . . 
sampahamsetvé utthåyåssnå pakkámi. etha kho bhagavå 
etasmim nidåne dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü åmentesi : na 
bhikkhave jånam uddissakatam mamsam paribhoüji- 
tabbam. уо paribhuüjeyys, Apatti dukkatasss. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave tikotiparisuddham macchamamsam айат 
asutam aparisankitan ti. |14181 


tena kho pana samayens Vesåli subbikkhå hoti susasså 
sulabhapipdå sukar& ufichena paggahena yåpetum. atha 
kho bhagavato rahogatassa patisallinassa evam cetaso pa- 
rivitakko ийврАйї: yåni (пі maya bhikkhünam anuññá- 
tani dubbhikkhe dussasse dullabhapinde anto vattham anto 
pakkam såmam pakkam uggshitapatiggahitakam tato niha- 
tam purebbattam patiggahitam vanattham pokkbarattham, 
ajjåpi nu kho tani bhikkhQ paribhufjantiti. atha kho 
bbagava siyanhasamayam patisalland vutthito Ayasmantam 
Апап дат åmantesi : yàni {Апі Ananda mayá bhikkhü- 
nam anufifiåtåni . . . paribhuijentiti, paribhufjanti bha- 
gavå ”ti. |1] афа kho bhagavá etasmim nidáne etssmim 
pakarane dhammikatham Кабуд bhikkhü &mentesi: yáni 
tani bhikkhave mayá bhikkhünem anuññàtáni dubbhikkhe 
dussasse dullabhapinde anto vuttham anto pakkam eámam pa- 
kkam uggahitapatiggabitakam tato nthatam purebbattam pa- 
tiggabitam vanattbam pokkharattham, tán' åbam ajjetagge 
patikkhipåmi. na bhikkhave anto vuttham anto pakkam så- 
mam pakkam uggabitapetiggahitakam paribhuiljitabbam. yo 
paribhuijeyya, åpatti dukkatassa. na ca bhikkhave tato nî- 
hatam purebhattam patiggshitam vanattham pokkbarattham 
bhuttåvinå paváritena anatirittam paribhusjitabbam. уо 
paribhufijeyya, yatbådhammo kåretabbo ”ti. [121991 


tena kho pane samayena jånapadå manusså bahum lonam 
pi telam pi tapdulam pi khådaniyam pi sakatesu åropetvå 
bahár&makottheko sakatsparivattam karitvå acchanti yadå 
patipåtim labhissma tadå bhattam karissåmå "ti, mahá ca 


YL 33. 1-6.) MAHAVAGGA. 239 


megho uggato hoti. atha kho te manusså yenåynsmå 
Anando ten’ upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitvå Ayasmantam 
Ánandam etad avocum: idha bhente Ånanda bahum lonam 
pi telam pi tandulam pi khádaniyam pi sakatesu åropetvå 
titthanti mahá ca megho uggato. katham nu kho bhante 
Ananda patipajjitabban ti. atha kho åyasmå Ánando bbagava- 
to etam attham ёгосеві. || tena h” Ananda samgho paccanti- 
mam vihåram kappiyabhümim sammannitvå tattha våse- 
tu yam samgho &kenkhati vibåram và addhayogam vå påså- 
dam vá hammiyam và guham và. evañ ca pana bhikkhave 
sammannitabbo: vyattena bbikkbunå patibalena samgho ñ&á- 
petabbo: sunita me bhante samgho. yadi eamghasea patta- 
kallam, samgho itthannåmam vibåram kappiyabhümim sam- 
manneyya. eå atti supåtu me bbante samgbo. samgho 
itthannåmam vibåram keppiyabhimim sammannati. yasså- 
yesmato khamati itthannåmassa vihárassa keppiyabbåmiyå 
sammuti, so tunh’ assa, yaesa na kkhamati, so bbåseyya. 
sammeto samghens itthannámo vihåro kappiyabhümi. kha- 
mati samghasss, tasmá tunbi, evam etam dhüreyámiti. [I2 | 
tena kho pana samayene manusså tatth' eva sammutiyå ka- 
ppiyabhümiy& yáguyo pacanti bbettåni pacanti såpåni sampå- 
denti mamsåni kottenti katthüpi phélenti. assosi kho bba- 
gavå rattiyå paccüsasamayam peccuttháya ucchsaddam mahå- 
saddam kåkoravasaddam, eutvåna åyasmentam Aneudam 
&mantesi: kim nu kho so Ananda uccüsaddo mahåsaddo 
kAkoravasaddo ”ti. |3|| еќатаћі bbante manuså tatth' eva 
earomutiyé kappiysbhåmiyå yåguyo pacauti bhattÁni pacanti 
süp&áni sampådenti mamsáni kottenti kattháni phálenti, so 
ево bhegavå uccüsaddo mahüsaddo kåkoravasaddo 'ti. atba 
kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü 
àmantesi : na bhikkhave sammuti kappiyabhimi pari- 
bhufijitabbå. yo peribhuüjeyya, åpatti dukkatasss. anujå- 
nimi bhikkhave tisso kappiysbhümiyo ussåvanantikam 
gonisådikam gahapatin ti. |4|] tena kho pana samayena 
Ayasmå Yasojo gilåno hoti, tass’ attháya bhessjjåni dhari- 
yyenti, tani bhikkhü bahi tthepenti. vkkapindakåpi 
kbådanti coråpi haranti. bhegevato etam attbam årocesum. 
anujknámi bhikkhave sammutim kappiysbhümim pa- 


240 MAHÁVAGGA. (V. 83. 6-34. 5. 


ribhufijitum. anujånåmi bhikkhave catasso kappiys- 
bhümiyo ussávenantikaum gonisádikam gabapatim sammu- 
tin ti. [51881 

cetuvisatibhånavårsm nitthitem. 


tena kho pana вашауепа Bhaddiyenagare Mendako 
gabapati pativasati, tassa evarüpo iddhånubhåvo hoti: sisam 
nabåyitvå dheüüügáram sammejjåpetvå bahidvåre ’va nisi- 
dati, antalikkhé dhafifiases dhårå opatitvå dhaünAgüram på- 
reti. bhariyáya evarüpo iddbånubbåvo hoti: еКай бета 
B]haketh&likam upanisiditvå ekañ ca sipavyafijanakam dása- 
kammakaraporisam bhattena parivisati, na tva tam khiyati 
yåva så na vuttháti. puttassa evarüpo iddhånubhåvo hoti: 
ekañ ñova sahessatthavikam gahetvå dåsakammakaraporisassa 
chammåsikam vetanam deti, na tåva tam khiyati уйт’ ama 
hatthagatá. [| || suņisåya evarüpo iddhånubbåvo hoti: ekaii 
fleva catudopikam pitskam upanisiditvå dásakammakarapori- 
sassa chammåsikar bhattam deti, na tava tam khiyati yåva så 
na vutthåti.  d&sasas evarüpo iddhånobbåvo hoti: ekena 
nangalena kasantassa satta sitåyo gacchanti. ||2|| asaosi kho 
råjå Mågadho Beniyo Bimbiséro: amhåkam kira vijite 
Bhaddiyanagare Mendako gahapati pativasati, tasea evarüpo 
iddhånubbåvo: sisam nabåyitvå dhaünàgáram sammejjåpetvå 
bahidvåre nisidati, entalikkhå dhaññassa dbårå opetitvå 
dheüüágüram påreti.  bbariyáya evarüpo iddhánubhávo: 
ekafi flova á]hakethálikam upenisiditvà ekafl ca s pevyailja- 
nakam dasakammakaraporisam bhettena parivisati, na (Ата 
tam khiyati yåva så na vutthåti. puttassa evarüpo iddhånu- 
bhávo: ekañ Пета sahassatthavikam gabetvå dåsakammaka- 
raporisassa chammåsikam vetanam deti, na tava tam khfyati 
yüv' assa hatihegaté. |1311 sunisåya evarüpo iddhånubhåvo: 
ekafi fieva catudonikam pitakam upanisiditvå disakammaka- 
raporisassa chammåsikam bhattam deti, na tava tam khiyati 
yåva så na vutthåti. dåsassa everüpo iddhånubbåvo: ekena 
nangalena kasantassa satta sitåyo gacchantfti. |141] atha kho 
råjå Magadho Seniyo Bimbisåro afifiataram sabbetthakam 
mahámattam åmentesi : amhükam kira bhaye vijite Bhaddi- 
yanagare Mepdako gahapeti pativasati, tassa ovarüpo iddhå- 


VI. 94. 5-9.] MAHÅVAGGA. 241 


nubhávo: віват . . . satta sitåyo gaccbanti. gaccha bhane 
jåuåhi, yatbå mayå såmam dittho evam tava dittho bhavissa- 
titi evam devå ‘ti kho so mabámatto rañño Mågadbassa 
Seniyassa Bimbisdrassa patisunitvå caturaåginiyå sen&ya ye- 
ns Bhaddiyam tena påyåsi. |51 anupubbena yena Bbaddi- 
yam yenes Mendako gahapati ten’ upasamkami, upasamka- 
mitvå Mendakam gahapatim etad avoca: aham hi gahapati 
raf &natto: ambükam kira bhane vijite . . . dittho bha- 
vissatiti. pass&ma te gahapati iddbånobhåvan ti, atha kho 
Mendako gahapati ateam naháyitvà dhaüü&gáram sammajjá- 
petvà behidvåre nisidi, antalikkhå dhaüüassa dhür& opatitvå 
dhaññágáram påresi. dittho te gahapati iddhånubhåvo, 
bhariyåya te iddhånubbåvam passissåmå "ti. |161 atha kho 
Mendako gahapati bhariyam ånåpesi: tena hi cataranginim 
senam bhattena parivisåhiti. atha kho Mendakassa gahapa- 
tissa bhariyó ekañ eva &]hakatbálikam upanisiditva екай сә 
süpavyaüjanakam caturanginim вепат bhattena perivisi, na 
tåva tam kbiyati yüva så ne vuttbåti. dittho te gahapati 
bhariy&ya pi iddbånubbåvo, puttassa te iddhånubhåvam pa- 
seisshmà "ti. 1711 atha kho Mendako gabapati puttam &nüpe- 
si: tena hi tata caturafigiviyé sepåya chammüsikam vetanam 
dehiti. atha kho Mendakesss gahapatissa putto ekafi fleva 
eahassatthavikam gahetvå caturanginiyà senåya chammåsi- 
kam vetanam adåsi, na tava tam kbiyati уйт’ assa hattha- 
gata. dittho te gahapati puttassa pi iddhünubhavo, su- 
nisåya te iddhdnubhavam passissåmå 'ti. |8] atha kho 
Mendako gahapati sunisam ånåpesi: tena hi caturanginiy& 
senåya chammåsikem bhattam debiti. atha kho Mendakassa 
gahapatisea suniså ekafi åeva catudonikam pitakam upanisi- 
ditvå caturanginiyá sendys chammåsikam bhettam adåsi, na 
tava tam khfyati yåva så na vuttbåti. dittho te gahapati su- 
nisdya pi iddhánubhávo, dåsassa te iddbånubbåvam pessissá- 
må ”ti. mayham kho sêmi dåsassa iddhånobbåvo khette 
passitabbo "ti. alam gahapati dittho te dåsassa pi iddhånu- 
bhåvo "ti. atha kho so mahåmetto caturanginiy& sendya pu- 
ned eva Rájagah am paccágacchi, yena raja Mågadho Seni- 
yo Bimbisáro ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvá гаййо Mága- 
dhasss Seniyasea Bimbisårassa etam attham ёгосеві. || 9 || 


voL. DL 16 


242 MAHÁVAGGA. (VI. 94. 10-13. 


atha kho bhagavé Veséliyam yatbAbhirantam vibaritvå 
yena Bhaddiyam tens cårikem pakkåmi mahaté bhikkhu- 
samghena saddhim addhatelasehi bhikkhusatehi. atha kho 
bhagavå anupubbena cårikam caramáno yena Bhaddiyam 
tad avasari. tatra sudam bhagavá Bhaddiye viharaü 
Játiy&vane. |101 assosi kho Mendako gahapati: sa- 
mano khalu bho Gotamo Sakyaputto Sakyakulå pebbejito 
Bhaddiyam snuppetto Bhaddiye viharati Jütiyávane. tam 
kho pana bhagavantam Gotamam evam kalyåno kittisaddo 
ebbhuggato iti pi so bbagavå araham sammåsambuddho 
vijjåcaranasempanno sugato lokavid( anuttaro purisedamma- 
sárathi satthá devamanussånam buddho bhagavá, so imam 
lokam sadevakam samåraksm sabrahmakem sassamanabråh- 
manim pajam sadevamanussam sayam abhiüflà sacchiketvå 
pavedeti, so dhammam deseti Adikalyanam majjhe kalyånam 
pariyosånakalyånam sattham savyaijanam kevalaparipunnam 
parisuddham brahmacariyam pekáseti. sådbu kho pana ta- 
thárüpánam srahetam dassanam hotiti. [11] ва kho 
Mendako gahapati bhadráni-bhadráni yånåni yojåpetvå bha- 
dram y4nam ebhirühitv& bhadrehi-bhadrehi yánehi Bhaddiy& 
niyyåsi bhagavantam dassanáya. addasamsu kho sambahulå 
titthiyå Mendakam gahapatim dürato "va Agacchantam, dis- 
vàua Mendakam gehapatim etad avooum : kaham {уаш ga- 
hapati gacchasiti. gacchám' sham bbante bbagavantam sa- 
manam Gotamam dessanáy& "і. kim рапа {уаш gahapeti 
kiriyavådo samáno akiriyavdam samanam Gotamam dassa- 
nåya upasamkamiesasi, samano hi gahapeti Gotamo akiriyavå- 
do akiriyåya dhammam deseti tena ca såvake vinetiti. || 12] 
atha kho Mendakassa gahapatissa etad ahosi: nissamsayam 
kho во bhagsvà araham ssmmåsambuddho bhaviesati yatbå 
yime tittbiyå usuyyantiti, yåvatikå уАпама bhümi yånene 
gantvå yånå paocorohitvá pattiko ’va yena bhagavá ten” upa- 
samkami, upssamkamitvà bhagavantam abbivådetvå ekam- 
antam nisidi. ekamantam nisinnessa kho Mendakassa ga- 
hapatisss bhagavå anupubbikatham kathesi seyyath’ idam : 
dånskatham — la — aparappaccayo satthu sisane bhaga- 
vantam etad avoca: abhikkantam bhante — gha — upása- 
kam mam bhagavá dhüretu ajjatagge pAnupetam asranam 


VI. 9&. 12-16.) MAHÅVAGGA. 243 


gatan ti, adhivåsetu ca me bhante bhagavå svátan&ya bha- 
ttam saddhim bhikkhusamghend 'ti.  adhivüsesi bhagavå 
tunhibhávens. ||13|| atha kho Menpdako gahapati bhagavato 
adhivåsanam viditvå uttbåyåsanå bhagevantam sbhivådetvå 
pedakkhinam Кабуд pakkåmi. atha kho Mendako gahapeti 
балай rattiyå accayena panitam kh&daniyam bhojaniyam pati- 
yådåpetvå bhagavato kålam årocåpesi: kålo bhante, nitthitam 
bhattan ti. atha kho bhagavå pubbanhasamayam nivåsetvå 
pattacivaram &dáya yena Mendakanss gahapatisss nivesanam 
ten’ upasamkami, npasamkemitvà pafifiatte Aeane nisidi aa- 
ddhim bhikkhusamghene. |1411 atha kho Mendakasss gaha- 
patissa bbariyå ca putto ca supisá ca dåso ca yena bhagavå 
ten’ upasamkamimsa, upesamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivá- 
detvå ekamantam ‘nisidimsu. tesam bhagavå anupubbiks- 
tham kathesi — la — aparappaccayA satthu sisane bhaga- 
vantem etad avocum: — gha — ete mayam bhante bhaga- 
vantam saranam gacchåma dhammañ ca bhikkhusamghaíl ca, 
upásake no bhagavå dhåretu ajjatagge pånupete saranam gate 
"і. [151 atha kho Mendako gabapati buddhapamukham 
bhikkhusamghar panitena kb&daniyena bhojaniyena saha- 
tthà santappetvå sampavåretvå bhagavantam bhuttåvim oni- 
tapettapånim ekawsntam nisidi. eksmantam nisinno kho 
Mendako gahapati bhagavantam etad avoca: yåva bbante 
bhagavå Bhaddiye viherati, tava sham buddhapamukbassa 
bhikkhusamghassa dhuvabbattenå 'ti. atha kho bhagavå 
Mendekam gashspatim dbemmiyå katbåys sandassetvà . . . 
sampehamsetvå uttbåyåssnå pakkåmi. ||16 | 

atha kho bhagavå Bhaddiye yathábhirentam viharitvà 
Mendakam gabapatim anåpuochå yens Åfiguttaråpo tena 
cårikam pakkAmi mahatå bhikkhusamghena saddhim addha- 
telasebi bhikkhusatebi. assosi kho Mendako gahapati: bha- 
gavå kira yena Anguttarüpo tena cárikam pakkanto mahatå 
. . . bhikkhusatehiti. atha kho Mendako gahapati dase ca 
kammekere ca &nüpesi: tens hi bhane bahum lopam pi telam 
рі tapdulam pi khádaniyam pi sakatesu &ropetvà Agacchatha, 
addbatelasåni ca gopålakesståni addhatelasini dhenusatåni 
ådåya &gacchantu, yettha bhagavantam passissáma tattha 
tarunens kbtrena bhojessåmå "ti. |11711 atha kho Mendako 


944 MAHÅVAGGA. [VL 94. 18-21. 


gabapati bhagavantam anter magge kantåre sambhåvesi. 
atha kho Mendako gahapati yena bhagavá ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abbivådetvå ekamantam atthå- 
si. ekamantam thito kho Mendako gabapati bhagavantam 
etad avoca: adbivåsetu me bhante bhagavå svátan&ya bha- 
ttam saddhim bbikkhusemgbenå ‘ti. adhivdsesi bhagavå 
tunhibhåvena. atha kho Mendako gabapati bhagavato 
edhivdsanam viditvå bhagavantam abhivüdetvà padakkhinam 
katvå pakkåmi. atha kho Mendako gahapati (авай rattiyk 
accayena penitam khådaniyam bhojaniyam patiyådåpetvå 
bhagavato külam årocåpesi: kålo bhante, nitthitam bhattan 
ti. 1181 atha kho bhagavå pubbanhasamayam nivüsetvá 
pattactvaram ådåya yena Mendakassa guhapatissa parivesanå 
ten’ upasamkami, upasamkemitvà pañňatte Asane nisidi aa- 
ddhim bhikkhusamghena. atha kho Mendako gabapati addha- 
telasåni gopålekasatåni &püpesi: tena bi bhane ekamekam 
dhenum gahetvå ekamekasea bhikkhuno upatitthatba tarane- 
na khirena bhojessåmå 'ti. atha kho Mendako gahapati 
buddbapamukham bhikkhusamgham panitena kbådaniyene 
bhojaniyena sahatthå eantappesi sampavåresi tarupena ca 
kbirena. bbikkbå kukkuccáyant& khtram na patiganbenti. 
patiganhatba bhikkheve paribbuñjathá 'ti. 11911 atha kbo 
Mendako gahapati buddhapamukham bhikkhusamgham pe- 
nitena khådaniyens bhojaniyena sahattbå santappetvå sampe- 
våretvå tarunena ca kbirena bhagavantam bhuttávim oníta- 
pattapánim ekemantam nisidi. ekamantam nisinno kho 
Mendako аһара bhagevantam etad avoca: santi bhante 
шаррй kantårå appodak& eppebbekkbå na викагё apåtheyye- 
na gantum. sAdho bbante bhagavá bhikkhünam påtbeyyam 
anujünátü "ti. athe kho bhegavà Mendakam gahapetim 
dhammiyå katbáya sandassetvå . . . sampahamsetvá uttha- 
yåsané pakká&mi.||20|| atha kho bhagav& etasmim nidáne 
dhammikathem katvå bhikkhü Amantesi: anujånåmi bhi- 
kkhave райса gorase kbiram dedhim takkam navanitam 
sappim. santi bhikkhave maggå kantårå appodakA appe- 
bbakkbå na sukarå apåtheyyena gantum. anujånåmi bhi- 
kkbave pátheyyam pariyesitum, tandulo tandulattbikens, 
muggo muggatthikena, máso måsstthikens, lopam lonattbi- 


VI. 94 21-85. 4.] MAHÁYAGGA. 245 


kena, gulo gulatthikena, telam telatthikena, sappi sappitthi- 
kena, santi bhikkhave manusså saddhå pasanná, te kappiya- 
kårakånam hatthe hirafifiam upanikkhipanti imin& eyyessa 
yam kappiyam tam deth& "ti. —anujánámi bbikkheve yam 
tato kappiyam tam såditum. na tv evåbam bhikkhave kena- 
сі pariyåyens játarüparejatam såditabbam pariyesitabban ti 
vadámiti. 121184 


atha kho bhagavå anupubbens cårikam caremáno yena 
Apanem tad avasari. asosi kho Keniyo јао: ,samano 
khalu bho Gotamo Sakyaputto Sakyakulå pabbajito Åpanam 
anuppatto Арапе viharati. tam kho pana bhugavantam 
Gotamam evam kalyáno kittisaddo abbhuggato — la — sådhu 
kho pane tathárüpánam erabatam dassanam hotiti. athe 
kho Keniyassa jatilassa etad shosi: kim nu kho aham sama- 
massa Gotamassa harüpeyyan ti. |l|| atha kho Keniyassa 
jatilassa etad ahosi: ye pi kho te bråhmanånam pubbakå 
isayo mantånam kattáro mantánam pevattåro yesam idam 
etarahi bråbmanå porünam mantapadam gítam pavuttam 
eamibitam tad anugáyanti tad anubhåsanti bhAsitam anubhé- 
santi vAcitam anuvácenti, seyyath’tdam: Atthako Vama- 
ko V&madevo Veesümitto Yamstaggi Angiraso 
Bhåradvåjo Vasettho Kassapo Bhagu, rattüparatà 
viratå vikálebhojan&, te evarüpáni p&n&ni sådiyimsu, ||2]| 
samano рі Gotamo rattüperato virato vik&labhojan&, arahati 
samano pi Gotamo evarüpüni pånåni saditun ti, pahütam på- 
nam petiyådåpetvå kåjehi gåbåpetvå yens bhagavå ten’ upa- 
eamkami, upasamkamitvé bhagavatå seddhim sammodi, sam- 
modaniyam  katham  sárapiyam —vitisåretvå ekamantam 
валі ekamsntam thito kho Keniyo jatilo bhagavantam 
etad атоса : patiganbåtu me bhavam Gotamo pånan ti, tena 
i Keniya bhikkhúnam dehiti. bhikkhü kukkuccåyantå na 

олыга — patiganhetha bhikkhave peribhuijathá "ti. 
"T atha kho Keniyo jatilo buddhapamukbam bbikkho- 
samgham pahûtehi pånehi sahatthá santappetvå sampevå- 
retvå bbagaventam dhotahattham onitapattapånim ekaman- 
tam nieidi. ekamantam nisinnam kho Keniyem јо ат bha- 
gavå dhammiyå kathåya sandassesi . . . sampahamsesi. atha 


246 MAHAVAGGA. (YL 88. 4-8. 


kho Keniyo jatilo bhagavatå dhammiyå katháya sandassito 

. . sampahameito bhagavantam etad avoca: adhivåsetu me 
bhavam Gotamo svatandya bhattam saddhim bhikkhusamghe- 
nå "ti. 11411 mahá kho Keniya bbikkhusamgho addhatelasáni 
bhikkhusatáni (тай ca bráhmaneeu abhippasanno "tL duti- 
yam pi kho Keniyo jatilo bhagavantam etad avoca: kiñ cApi 
bho Gotama mahå bhikkbusamgho addhatelasáni bhikEkhusa- 
tåni аһай ca bråbmanesu abhippasanno. adhivåsetu ше... 
bhikkhusamghená 'ti. mahá kho . . . abhippasanno "ti. 
tatiyam pi kho Keniyo jatilo bhagavantam etad avoca: kiñ 
сарі . . . saddhim bhikkhusamghená "і adhivdsesi bhaga- 
vå tunbibbåvene. athe kho Keniyo jatilo bhagavato adhivå- 
sanam viditvå uttháyüsan& pakkåmi. ||5|| atha kho bbagavå 
etasmim nidåne dbammikstham Кабуд bhikkhü Amentesi : 
anujånåmi bhikkhave attha pånåni: ambapånam jambupå- 
nam oocapånåm mocapånam madbup. muddikåp. sålukap. 
pbårusakapånam. snujdndmi bhikkhave sabbam phalera- 
sam thapetvá dhefifiaphelerasam. aoujånåmi bhikkhave 
sabbam pattarasam tbapetvå dåksrasam. anuján&mi bhi- 
kkhave eabbam puppharasam thapetvå madhukapupphe- 
газар. anujånåmi bhikkhave ucohurasen ti. |61 

aths kho Keniyo jatilo tasså rattiy& accayena sake asamo 
penitam khådaniyam bhojaniyam patiyádápetvá bhagavato 
kålam árocápesi: kálo bho Gotama, nitthitam bhattan ti. 
atha kho bhagavå pubbanhasamayum pivåsetvå pattacivaram 
&dáye yena Keniyassa jatilassa assamo ten’ upasamkami, upa- 
samkamitvà pafiflatte &ssne nisidi saddhim bhikkbusamghe- 
na, atha kho Keniyo jatilo buddhapamukham bbikkhu- 
eamgham panitena khådaniyene bhojaniyena ssbettbå santa- 
ppetvà eampavüretvà bhagsventam bhuttávim onitapattapå- 
рїп ekamantam nisidi. [7|]: ekamantam nisinnam kho 
Keniyam jetilam bbagavå imáhi gátháhi anumodi : 

sggihuttamukbå yaññà, såvitthi chandaso mukham, 

raja mukham manussånem, nadinam sågaro mukham,| 

nakkhattánam mukham cando, Adicco tapatam mukham, 

pufifiam &kenkhamán&ánam samgho ve jayatam mukhan ti. 
atha kho bbagavà Keniyam jatilam imåhi gåtbåhi anumodi- 
två uttháy&san& pakkåmi. 181361 


VI. 36. 14.] MAHÁVAGGA. 247 


atha kho bhagavå Арапе yathåbhirantam viharitvà yens 
Kusinårå tene cárikam pskkámi mahatå bhikkhusamghena 
saddhim eddhatelasebi bhikkhusatehi. sssosum kho Kosi- 
nárskà Mallå: bhagavå kira Kusiniram ügacchati mahatå 
bhikkhasamghena saddhim addhatelasehi bhikkhusatehiti. 
te samgaram akamsu : yo bhagavato paccuggamanam na ka- 
rissati райса satáni dando 'ti. tena kho pena eamayena 
Rojo Mello åyasmato Ánandassa sahåyo hoti. atha kho 
bhagevå anupubbena cårikam caremáno yena Kusinårå tad 
avasari [1] atha kho Kosinårakå Mallá bhagavato paoou- 
ggamsnam akamsu. atha kho Rojo Mallo bhagavato paccu- 
ggamanam karitvå yen&yasmá Anando ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkemitvå Ayasmantam Anandam abhiv&detvá ekaman- 
tam sttbåsi. ekamantam thitam kho Бојат Mallam åyasmå 
Ånando etad evoca: ujürem kho te idam Avuso Roja yam 
tvam bhagaveto pacouggamanam akåsiti. nåham bhante 
Ananda bahuketo buddhena và dhammena vå sarnghena vå, 
spi ca flátihi samgaro kato yo bhagavato paccuggamanam па 
karisesti pafica aatåni dando ”ti. ва kho aham bhante Ånsnda 
fiktinam dandabbayå ev&ham bhagavato paccuggamanam 
skAsin ti. atha kho &yasmá Anando anattamano ahosi: ka- 
tham hi n&ma Rojo Mallo evam vekkbatiti. |121 atha kho 
åyasmå Ánando yena bhagava ten’ upasamkami, upasamka- 
mitvå bhagsvantam sbhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi. ekam- 
antam nisinno kho Ayasmå Anando bbagavantam etad атоса: 
ayam bhante Rojo Mallo abhiüfü&to fidtamanusso, mahiddhi- 
yo kho pana evaråpånam Øåtamsnussånem imesmim dha- 
mmavinaye pasådo. sådhu bhante bhagavå tathá karotu yathå 
Rojo Mallo imasmim dhammavinaye pasideyy& "ti na kho 
tam Ananda dukkaram tathågatena yathå Rojo Mallo ima- 
amim dhammavinaye pasideyyå 'ti. |131 atha kho bhagavå 
Rojam Mallam mettens cittena pharitvé utthAydsané vihåram 
påvis. etha kho Rojo Mallo bhagavatå mettena cittena 
phuttho seyyathápi náma gåvi tarunavsoohå evam eva vihå- 
rena vihåram perivegena parivenam upasamkamitvá bhikkh ñ 
pucchati: kaham nu kho bhante etarahi so bhagavá viharati 
araham eammåsambuddho, dasssnakåmå bi mayam tam bbe- 
gavantam arahantam sammásambuddhan ti. es’ &vuso Roja 


948 MAHÁVAGGA. [VI. 9& 4-7. 


vibáro eamvutadvåro, tena appasaddo upasamkamitvå atara- 
måno álindam pavisitvå ukkåsitvå aggalam åkotehi, viva- 
rissati te bhagavå dvåran ti. |141 atha kho Rojo Mallo yena 
во vihåro samvutadvåro tene appasaddo upasamkamitvå ata- 
ramåno ålindam pevisitvå ukkAsitva aggajam åkotesi, vivari 
bhagevå dvåram. atha kho Rojo Mallo vihåram pavisitvå 
bhagavantam abhivådetvå ekamantam nistdi, ekamantam 
nisinnassa kho Rojassa Mallessa bhagavá anupubbikatham 
kathesi seyyath’ tdam: dånakathem — la — aparappaccayo 
eatthu såsane bhagavantam etad avoca: sidhu bhante ayyå 
шашай üeva petiganheyyum civarapindapåtasenåsanagilåna- 
paccayabhesajjaparikkbåram no аййевап ti. yesam kho Roja 
sekbena ñánena sekhene dassanena dhammo dittho seyyathá- 
pi tayå tesam pi evam hoti: abo nüna ayyå ambåkaå eva 
patiganheyyum civarapindapdtasendsanagilanapaccayabhesa- 
jjeperikkháram no aññesan ti. tena hi Roja tava с’ eva pa- 
tiganbissanti afifiesad cå "ti. |1611 

tena kho pana samayena Kusinåråyam panitànam bha- 
ttånam bhattapatipéti adbitthité hoti. atha kho Rojassa 
Mallassa patipátim alabhantassa etad ahosi: yam nånåham 
bhattaggam olokeyyam, yam bhettagge n&ddasam tam pa- 
tiy&deyyan ti аа kho Rojo Mallo bhattaggam olokento 
dve náddasa dákaf ca pitthakhAdaniyai ca. “etha kho 
Rojo Mallo yenåyssmå Anando ten’ upasamkami, upa- 
samkamitvå ёувашапќат Anandam etad avoca: idha me 
bhante Ananda patipåtim alabbentasss etad ahosi: yam 
пфпаһаш bhsttaggam olokeyyam, yam bhettagge nåddasam 
tam patiyådeyyan ti. so kho aham bhante Ananda bhatta- 
ggam olokento dve nåddasam dákafi ca pitthakhAdaniyafi ca. 
sac’ Aham bbante Ananda patiyådeyyam dàkañ ca pitthakba- 
daniyafi ca, patigenheyya me bhagavå 'ti tena hi Roje 
bbagavantam patipucchissåmiti. |6[ atha kho åyasmå 
Ånando bhagavato etam attham ёгосеві. tens h’ Ananda 
patiyadetO "ti. tena hi Roja patiyddebiti. otha kho Rojo 
Mallo tasså rattiyå accayena pahütam dàkañ ca pitthakháda- 
піуай ca patiy&dápetvà bhagaveto upenåmesi patiganbåtu 
me bhaute bhagavå dákañ ca pittbakhådeniyefi cA 'ti. tene 
hi Roja bhikkbünam debiti. bbikkhfi kukkuccåyantå па pa- 


VL 36. 7-87. 4.) MAHÅVAGGA. 249 


tigaghanti. patigaphatha bhikkbave peribhuiljetb&. 'ti ||7 || 
atha kho Rojo Mallo buddbapamukham bhikkhusamgham 
pehütehi dåkehi ca pitthakhádaniyehi ca sahattbå santappe- 
två sampavåretvå bhagavantam dhotahattham onítapattapá- 
nim ekamantam nisidi. ekamantam nisinnam kho Rojam 
Mallam bbagsvå dhammiyé katbåye sandassetvå . . . sampa- 
hamsetvå utthåyåsanå pakkåmi. atha kho bbagavå etasmim 
nidåne dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü åmentesi: anujånåmi 
bhikkhave sabbañ ca dåkam sabbaü ca pitthakhadani- 
yan ti. 18186 


atha kho bhegavà Kusinåråyam yatbåbbirantam viha- 
ritvå yena Átumá tena cárikam pakkåmi mebatå bbikkhu- 
eamghena saddbim addbatelasebi bhikkhusatehi tena kho 
pana eamayens aññataro vuddhapabbejito Åtumåyam pativa- 
sati nahüpitapubbo, tassa dve dårakå honti maøjukå pati- 
bháneyyaká dakkhå pariyodåtasippå sake &cariyake nahåpi- 
takamme. |11  assosi kho so vuddbapebbejito: bhagavå 
kira Átumam ågaccheti mahatà bhikkhusamghena saddhim 
addhatelasehi bhikkhusatebiti. atha kho so vuddhapabbajito 
te dårake etad avoca: bhagavå kira tata Atumam Agacchati 
mahatá bhikkhusamghena eaddhim addhatelasehi bhikkhusa- 
tehi. gacchstha tumhe {Аа khurabhandam &dáya nåliyå- 
vapakena anugharekam-anugharskem Shindatha lopam pi 
telam pi tandulam pi khådeniyam pi eamharathe, bhagavato 
agatasaa yågupånam karissåmå ’ti. |2|| evam tata 'ti kho te 
dáraká tassa vuddhapebbajitessa patisunitvå khurabbandam 
ådåya nåliyåvåpakena anugharakam-anugharakam åhipdenti 
lopam pi telam pi tandulam pi khådaniyem pi samharantå. 
manussá te dårake maüjuke patibhåneyyake passitvå ye pi 
na kåråpetukåmå te pi kárüpenti kåråpetvåpi bahum denti. 
atha kho te dårakå bahum lonam pi telam pi tandulam pi 
khådaniyam pi sambarimsu. [| 3 || 

atha kho bhagavå anupubbena cárikam caramåno yens 
Åtumå tad avasari. tatra eudam bhagav& AtumAyam vi- 
harati Bhüságüre. atha kho so vuddbapabbejito tassi 
rattiyå accayena pshütam yågum patiyådåpetvå bhagavato 
upanåmesi patiganbåtu me bhante bhagavà yågun ti jà- 


250 MAHÅVAGGA. (УІ. 87. 4-40 1. 


nantåpi tathågatå puochanti — ls — såvakånam vA sikkhå- 
padam pefifidpessima "Н. atha kho bhagavå tam vuddhe- 
pebbajitam etad avoca: kut’ Ayam bhikkhu y&gü "ti. atha 
kho so vuddhapabbajite bhagavato etam attham Агосеві. || 4 J 
vigarahi buddho bhagava: ananucchaviyam moghapuriss ana- 
nulomikar appatirüpam essimanakam akappiyam akarani- 
yam. Каат hi náms tvem moghapuriss pebbejito akappi- 
ye samAdapessasi. n’ etam moghapurisa appssannånam và 
pasådåya. vigarahitvå dhammikatham кабуд bhikkhü éman- 
tesi: na bhikkhave pabbejitens akappiye samådape- 
tabbem. yo samådapeyye, åpetti dukkatassa. па ca bhi- 
kkhave nahåpitspubbens khurabhandsm pariharitabbam. 
yo pariharey ye, åpatti dukkatasså "ti. 15137 || 


athe kho bhagavå Atnmayam yathdbbirantam vihari- 
två yena Såvatthi tens cárikam pakkámi anupubbens 
cárikam caramáno yena Savatthi tad avasari. tatra sudam 
bbagevå Savatthiyam vihereti Jetavane An&tha- 
pindikassa åråme. tena kho pana eamayena Såvatthiyam 
bahum phalakb&ádaniyam ussannam hoti. atha kho bhikkhü- 
nam etad ahosi: kim nu kho bhagavatå pbalakhAdaniyam 
anuifidtam kim ananuüüütan ti. bhagavato etam attham 
årocesum. enpujånåmi bhikkhave sabbam phalakh&dani- 
yan ti. [11881 


tena kho pane semayeps samghikáni bijáni puggalikåye 
bhümiyá ropiyanti, puggalikáni btjáni samghikáya bbümi- 
yñ ropiyanti. bhagsvato etam attham &rocesum. semghi- 
Капі bbikkhave bijåni puggslikàya bhümiy& ropitåni 
bbågam datvå paribhuüjitabbàni, puggalik&ui btjåni 
samghikåya bhümiy& ropitáni bhagamp datvå peribhusji- 
tabbaniti. 11189 


tena kho pana samayena bhikkhünam kismiñci-kismiñcei 
апе kukkuocam uppajjati: kim nu kho bhagavatá anuñðà- 
tam kim ananuåfiåtan ti bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 
yam bhikkhave mayá idam na kappatîti sppatikkhittam, tañ 
ce akeppiyam anulometi kappiyam petibåheti, tam vo na 
kappati. yam bhikkhave mayá idam па kappatiti appa- 


VL 40. 1-3.] MAHÁVAGGA. 251 


tikkhittam, tan ce kappiyam anulometi akappiyam petibåha- 
ti, tam vo kappati. уай ca bhikkhave mayå idam kappatiti 
ananuiifiAtam, tañ ce akappiyam enulometi kappiyam patibá- 
hati, tam vo na kappeti. yam bhikkhave mayå idam 
kappetiti ananuññátam, (ай ce kappiyam anulometi akappi- 
yam patibåheti, tam vo kappatiti. 11 

etha kho bhikkhünam etad аһові : kappati nu kho yå- 
vakülikena yåmakålikam na nu kho kappati. kappati nu 
kho yavakalikena sattåhakålikem na nu kho kappati. ka- 
ppsti nu kho yåvakålikena yAvajivikam na nu kho kappati. 
kappeti nu kho yAmakalikena sattáhakülikam na nu kho 
kappeti, kappeti nu kho yámakálikene yåvsjivikam na nu 
kho kappeti. kappati nu kho sattåhekålikene yAvajivikam 
na nu kho kappatiti. bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. [12 | 
yhvekálikena bhikkhave yåmakålikam tadahu patiggahi- 
tam kâle kappati vikåle na kappati. yüvakálikena bhi- 
kkhave asttåhakålikeam tadahu patiggahitam kâle kappeti 
vikåle na kappati. yåvakålikene bhikkhave yåvejivikam 
tadahu patiggahitam kâle kappati vikále na kappati. 
yamakAlikena bhikkhave sattåhakålikam t. p. уйше 
kappeti yåmåtikkente na kappati. y&makálikena bhikk- 
have yåvsjivikam t. p. уйше kappati yåmåtikkante na 
kappsti. sstt&hakálikena bhikkhave ydvajivikam sattå- 
ham kappati satt&hátikkante na kappatiti. 3140 il 

bbesajjekkhendhakem chattham. 


imambi khandhake vatthum ekasatam chavatthum. tassa 
uddánar : 

sársdike, vikAle рі, vasam, måle, pitthehi ca, 
kas&vehi, panna-phalam, jatu-lopam, chakanam ca, 
cuppam, cálini, mamsan ca, añjanam, upapisanam, 
afljani, ucca-parutá, salàk&, ealákodbani,| 
thavikam, bandhakam, suttam, muddhani telam, nattbu ca, 
natthukarapi, dhümai ca, netta, сё, 'pidhånam, thavi,| 
telapAkesu, majjaü ca, atikkhitte-abbhaüjapam, 
tumbam, sedam, sambhårafl ca, mabá-bhangodakam tath,| 
dakakottham, lohitaå ca, visåpnam, püdabbhafijenam, 

5 pejjam, sattham, Казтай ca, tilakakke-kabajikar,| 


252 MAHÅVAGGA. 


colam, sásspekuttefi ca, dh(ima-sakkharikaya са, 
vanatelam, vikåsikam, vikataii ca, patiggaham,| 
gütbam, ksronto, loliå са, khåram, muttaharitakt, 
gandhå, тігесапей o'eva, acchá, "kata-kat&katam,| 
paticchádani-pabbhárá, åråmi, sattahena ca, 
gulam, muggam, sovirufi ca, såmapåkå, punå расе, 
pundnofifidei, dubbhikkhe, phalaii co, tila-khádani, 
purebhattam, kåyadåho, nibbatta ca, bhagandalam,| 
vattbikammai ca, Suppi ca, manussamarsam eva ca, 
10 hatthi, asså, sunakho ca, ahi, siha-vyaggha-dipikam,| 
acche-taraccohamamsaü ca, patipiti ca, yagu ca, 
tarupam аййвігв, gulam, Sunidh'-bvasatbågåram,| 
Ambapáli са, Licchavi, Gangá, Koti saccakath4, 
uddissakatam, subhikkham puned eva petikkhipi,l 
megho, Yasojo, Mendako ca, gorasam pátheyyakena са, 
Keni, ambo, jambu, coca-moca-madhu, muddikt, sAlukam,| 
phárusaká, dáke-pittham, Åtumåyam nabápito, 
Bávetthiyam phala-bijam, kasmim thåne ca, kAliko ”ti. 


MAHAVAGGA. 


VII, 


Tens samayene buddho bhagavá Såvettbiyam vibereti 
Jetavane Anåthapindikassa Åråme. tena kho pane 
samayena timsamattå Påtheyyekå bhikkhü sabbe åra- 
üüakà sabbe pindapátif& ssbbe pamsukülikà sabbe tectvarika 
Såvatthim gacchantå bbagavantam dessanüya upekattbåye 
vasstpanåyikåya nåsakkbimeu Bávatthiyam vassåpenåyikem 
smbbåvetum, antarå magge Sakete vassam upagacchimeu. 
te ukkanthitarüp& vassam vasimsu: åsanneva no bhagsvå vi- 
harati ito chasu yojanesn ne ca mayam labháma bbaga- 
vantam dassanåyå "ti. atha kho te bhikkhü vasam vutthå 
temAsaccayens katüya paváron&ya deve vassante udakasamge- 
he udakacikkhalle okapunnehi civarehi kilantarüp& yena Bå- 
vatthi Jetavanam Anáthapipdikassa &rámo yena bbagavå 
ten’ upasamkamimsu, upasamkemitvå bhagavantam abhivå- 
detvå ekamantam nisidimsu. |1] &cinpam kho pan’ etam 
buddbånam bhagavantánam Agantukebi bhikkbühi saddbim 
patisammoditum. atha kho bhagavå te bhikkhf etad avoca: 
kacci bhikkhave khamaviyam, kacci yåpantyam, kacci sam- 
aggå sammodamånå avivademfn& phåsukam vessam va- 
sittha na ca pindakena kilemittbá "ti. kbamaniyam bha- 
gavå, yapaniyam bbegavå, semaggå ca mayam bhante sam- 
modamånå avivadamånå vassam vasimhá na ca pindakens 
kilamimhé. idba mayam bhente timsamattå Påtbeyyakå 
bhikkhQ Såvatthim ågacchantå bhagavantam dassandya upa- 
katthdya vasefipandyikdya nåsakkhimbå Såvetthiyam vassü- 
panåyikem sambhåvetum, antará magge Såkete vassam upa- 
gacchimhå. te mayam bbante ukkentbitaråpå vassam va- 


254 MAHÅVAGGA. (VII. 1. 2-5. 


simhå : åsanneva no bhagavå viharati ito chasu yojanesu na 
са mayam labháma bhagavantam dassanåyå 'ti. atha kho 
mayam bhante vassam vutthá temásaccayena katåya pavára- 
пАуа deve vassante udakasamgahe udakacikkhalle okapunne- 
hi civarehi kilantaråpå addhánam Agata 'ti. ||2|| atha kho 
bhagavå etasmim nidáne dhammikatham ketvà bhikkhü 
Amantesi: anuján&mi bhikkhave vassam vutthånam bhikkhd- 
nam kathinam attharitum. atthatakathinünam vo bhi- 
kkhave рейсе kappissanti an&mantacáro asamådånacåro gana- 
bhojanam y&vedatthaciveram yo oa tattha civaruppådo so 
nemam bhaviesati. atthatakathinfnam vo bhikkhave imåni 
райса kappissanti. evañ ca pana bhikkhave kathinam attha- 
ritabbam : |31 vyattena bhikkhun& patibalena eamgho ñë- . 
petabbo: sunåtu me bhante samgho. „idam samghasss kathi- 
nadussam uppannam. yedi samghessa pattakallam, samgho 
imam kethinadussam itthann&massa bhikkhuno dadeyya ka- 
thina attharitum. eá fiatti. supåtu me bbante samgho. 
idam samghessa kathinadussam uppannem.  samgho imam 
kathinadussam  itthann&masss bhikkhuno deti kathinam 
attharitum. — yassáyasmato khamati imassa kathinaedussassa 
itthenn&ámassa bhikkhuno dånam kathinam attharitum eo 
tunh’ авва. yessa ng kkbamati so bhåseyya. dinnam idam 
samghena kethinaduseam itthanndmassa bhikkhuno kathinam 
attharitum. khemati samghases, tasmå tunbi, evam etam 
dhårayåmiti. |4|| evam kho bhikkhave atthatam hoti kathi- 
nam, evam anatthatam. kathai ca bhikkhave anatthatam 
hoti kethinam. па ullikhitamattena atthetam hoti kathi- 
nam, na dhovanemattena atthatam hoti kathinam, na cfvara- 
vicåranamattena atth. h. kath., na cchedanamattena atth. h. 
k., na bandbanamattena atth. h. k., na ovettikakarapama- 
ttena atth. h. k., ne kandusakaranamattene atth. h. k., na ` 
dajhikammakaranamattens atth. h. k., ne anuv&takarapa- 
mattena atth. h. k., na paribhandakaranamattena atth. h. k., 
na ovaddheyyakaranamattena attb. h. k, he kambalamadda- 
namattena atth. h. Е., na nimittakatena atth. h. k., na pari- 
kathákatena atth. h. k., па kukkukatena atth. h. k., na 
saunidhikatena atth. h. k., na nissaggiyena atth. h. k., na 
akappakatena atth. h. k., na aññatra samghátiya atth. h. k., 


ҮП. 1. 8-8. 2.) MAHÅVAGGA. 255 


па аййа{та uttarüsangena atth. h. k., na afifiatra antaravåss- 
kena atth. h. k, na аййа!та райсакепа vå atirekapaficakena 
và tadah’ eva safichinnena samandalikstens atth. h. k., na 
аййа(га puggalasss atthårå аһ. h. kathinam. sammå c’ eva 
atthatam hoti kathinam tañ ce nissimattho anumodati evam 
pi anatthatam hoti kathinam. evam kho bhikkhave anattha- 
tam hoti kathinam. 151 kathañ ca bhikkhave atthatam hoti 
kathinam. ahatena atthatam hoti kathinam, ahatakappena 
etth. h. k., pilotikåya atth. h. k, pamsukülens atth. h. k., 
рёрашКепа stth. h. k., animittakatena atth. h. k., aperika- 
thakatena atth. b. k., akukkukatena atth. h. k., asannidhika- 
tena atth. h. k., anissaggiyena аЬ. h. k., kappakatena atth. 
h. k., samghåtiyå atth. h. k., uttar&sangens atth. h. k., anta- 
ravåsakena etth. h. k. pañcakena vå atirekapeficakena YÁ 
tadah’ eva saichinnene samendalikatena attb. h. k., pugga- 
lassa atthürá etth. h. k., sammå c’ eva atthatam hoti kathi- 
nam tañ ce simattho апашойан evam рї atthatam hoti kathi- 
nam. evam kho bhikkhave atthatam hoti kathinam. ||6/l 

katheü ca bhikkbave ubbhatam hoti kathinam. atth’ imå 
bhikkhave mátik& kathinassa ubbh&ráya pakkamananti- 
ka nittbånantiké sannittbånantikå påsanantikå eavanantiká 
AeA vacchedikå stmåtikkantikå eshubbhárà "ti. 11714111 


bhikkhu stthatakatbino katacivaram &dáya pakkamati na 
paccessan ti. tama bhikkhuno pakkamenantiko kathinu- 
ddháre. bhikkhu atthatakathino civaram &dáya pakkamati, 
tassa bshisiragetassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kê- 
гевва na peccesssn ti, so tam civaram kåreti. tassa bhi- 
kkhuno nitthánantiko kathinuddhåro. bhikkhu atthataka- 
thino civaram ådåya pakkamati, tassa bahisimagatassa evam 
hoti : n’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam na paccessan ti. tamea 
bhikkhuno eannittbánantiko kathinuddhöro. bhikkhu attha- 
takathino civaram Adaya pakkamati, tassa bahisimagatassa 
evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam na pacoeesan ti, 
ao tam civaram káreti, tassa tam civaram kayiramånam nassa- 
ti. tassa bhikkhuno n&sanantiko kethinuddháro. |111 bhi- 
kkhu atthetakethino civaram &dáya pekkameti paocessan ti, 
so behisimagato tam civaram kåreti, so katacivaro sunåti: 


256 | MAHÁVAGOA. (VII. 3. 2-3. 3. 


ubbhatam kira tasmim åvåse kathinan ti. tassa bhikkhuno 
savanantiko kathinuddbáro. bhikkbu atthatakathino civa- 
ram ádáya pakkamati peccessan ti, so babisimagato tam 
civaram kåreti, so katacivaro paccessam paccessan ti bahi- 
ddbå katbinuddhåram vitinåmeti. tassa bhikkhuno simå- 
tikkantiko kethinuddháro. bhikkhu atthatakathino civaram 
Adaya pakkamati paccessan ti, so bahisimagato tam civaram 
kåreti, во katacivaro paccessam paccessan ti sambhunåti ka- 
thinuddháram. tassa bhikkhuno saha bbikkhåbi kathinu- 
ddhåro. (12 12 II 
ådåyesettekam nitthitam. 


bhikkhu atthatakathino katactvaram samådåya pakkamati 
ne paccesaan ti. tassa bhikkhuno pakkamanantiko katbinud- 
dbåro. bbikkhu atthatakathino civaram samádáya pakka- 
mati, tases bahisimagatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civa- 
ram küressam na paccessan ti, во tam civaram kåreti. tasea 
bhikkhuno nitthånantiko kethinuddháro. bhikkhu atthata- 
kathino civaram samådåya pakkamati, tassa bebisimagatassa 
evam hoti: n’ ev’ imam civeram kåressam na paccessen ti. 
tassa bhikkhuno sannitthünentiko kethinuddbáro. bbikkhu 
attbatakethino civaram samadéys pekksmeti, tassa behist- 
magatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam na 
paccessan ti, so tam clvaram káreti. tasaa tam civarum 
kayiramünam nassati. tassa bhikkhuno n&sanantiko kathin- 
:uddháro. 111  bhikkhu atthatakathino civaram samádáya 
pakkamati pacoeassn ti, so bahisimagato tam civeram káreti, 
so katacivaro sunåti: ubbhatam kira tasmim åvåse kathinan 
ti. tassa bbikkhuno savenantiko katbinuddbåro. bbikkbu 
atthatakathino civaram samådåya pakkamati pacceesan ti, so 
bahieimagato tam civaram kåreti, so katacivaro paccessam 
paccessan ti bebiddhå kathinuddhárem vitinåmeti. tassa 
bhikkhuno simåtikkentiko kathinuddháro. bhikkhu attha- 
takathino civaram samådåys pekkamati pacoeesan ti, so ba- 
hisimagato tam civaram kåreti, so katacivaro paccessam 
paccessan ti sambhunåti kathinuddbháram. tassa bhikkhuno 
saha bhikkhühi ketbinuddhåro. [121811 

samádáyasattakam nitthitam. 


VII. 4 1-6. 2.) MAHÁVAOGA. 257 


bhikkhu atthatakathino vippakatacivaram &dáya pakka- 
mati, tassa bahisimagatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam 
civaram kåressam na paccessan ti, so tam civaram kåreti. 
tassa bhikkhuno nitthánantiko . . . (= ch. 2; read vippaka- 
tacivaram &dáya instead of civaram ådåya; (Ae pakkaman- 
antiko kathinuddhåro бз omitted.) . . . saha bhikkhühi 
kathinuddbéro. 11141 

&d&yachakkam nitthitam. 


bhikkhu atthatakethino vippakataoivaram samådåya pa- 
kkamati, tassa bahisimagatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev imam 
civaram kåressam па peocessan ti, во tam civaram kåreti. 
tassa bhikkhuno nitthánantiko . . . (= ch. 3; read vippaka- 
tacivaram samådåya instead of civaram samådåyae ; the pakka- 
manantiko katbinuddhåro is omitted.) . . . saha bhikkhühi 
kathinuddháro. tlis 

samådåysebakkam. 


bhikkhu etthatakathino civaram &dáya pekkamati, tassa 
babisimagatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam 
па pecceasan ti, во tam civaram kåreti. tassa bhikkhuno 
vitthånentiko kethinuddháro. bbikkhu atthatekathino civa- 
ram Adaya pekkamati, tassa bahistmagatasea evam hoti: 
п’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam na pacceasan ti. tassa bhi- 
kkbano espnnitthánantiko kathinuddhéro. bbikkhu atthata- 
kathino etvaram Adaya pakkamati, tassa bahisimagatassa 
evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kAressam na paccessan 
ti, so tam civaram kåreti. tassa tam civaram kayiremånam 
nassati. tassa bbikkbuno nåsanentiko kathinuddháro. ||l|| 
bbikkbu atthstakathino civeram ådåyae pakkamati na pa- 
ссеевап ti, tassa bahisimagatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam 
civaram káressan ti, во tam civeram káreti. tassa bhikkhuno 
nittbånantiko kathinuddbåro. bbikkhu atthatakathino civa- 
ram ádáya pakkamati na рассеввап ti, tassa bahisimagatessa 
evam hoti: n' ev’ imam civaram kåressan ti. tassa bhi- 
kkhuno sannittbånantiko kathinuddhéro. bhikkhu atthata- 
kathino civaram ådåya pakkemeti na paccessan ti, tassa 
bahistmagatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressan, 


vor. тп. 17 


958 MAHÅVAGOA. (VII. €. 2-4. 


ti, so tam civaram kåreti, tassa tam civaram kayiramánam 
nassati. tassa bhikkhuno n&sanantiko kathinuddháro. [21 
bhikkhu atthatakathino civaram &dáya pakkamati anadhi- 
tthitena, n’ ev’ assa hoti paocessan ti, na pan’ aa hoti na 
paccessan ti, tassa bahistmagatassa evam boti : idh’ ev’ imam 
civaram kåressam na psccessan ti, so tam civaram kåreti. 
tama bhikkhuno nitthánantiko kathinuddhåro. bhikkhu 
atthatakathino civaram &dáya pakkamati anadhitthitena, n 
ev’ aasa hoti paccessan ti, na pan’ assa hoti na paccesean ti, 
tassa bahisimagatassa evam hoti: n’ ev’ imam civaram 
kåressam ne paccessan ti. tassa bbikkbuno eapnittbánantiko 
kathinuddháro. bhikkhu atthatakathino civaram ådåya pa- 
kkamati anadbitthitena, п’ ev’ assa hoti paccessan ti, na pan’ 
asaa hoti na paccessan ti, tassa bahisimagatassa evam hoti : 
idh’ ev’ imam civaram küressam na pacceasan ti, so tam civa- 
ram kåreti, tassa tam civaram kayiramånam nassati. tassa 
bhikkhuno nåsanantiko kathinuddhéro. ||3|| bbikkbu atthata- 
kathino civaram ådåye pakkamati paccessan ti, tassa bahiei- 
magatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram káressam na 
paccessan ti, во tam civaram kåreti. tassa bhikkhuno nitthån- 
antiko kathinuddbåro.  bhikkhu atthatekathino civaram 
ådåya pakkamati paccessan ti, tassa babisimagatassa evam 
hoti: п’ ev’ imam cfvaram kåressam na paccessan ti. tassa 
bhikkhuno sannitthånantiko kethinuddh&ro. bbikkhu attha- 
takathino civuram ådåya pekkamati paccessan ti, tassa bahist- 
magatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam na 
paccessan ti, so tam civaram kåreti, tassa tam civaram 
kayiramånam passati. tassa bhikkbuno nåsanantiko kathi- 
nuddháro. bhikkhu atthatakathino civaram ådåye pakka- 
mati paccessan ti, so babisimagato tam civaram kåreti, so 
katacivaro sunåti: ubbhatam kira tasmim åvåse kathinan ti. 
tassa bhikkhuno savauantiko kathinuddháro. bhikkhu atthe- 
tekethino civaram &dáya pakkamati paocessan ti, so bahisi- 
wagato tam civaram kåreti, so katacivaro paccessam paccessan 
ti babiddbå ketbinuddbåram vitinåmeti. tassa bhikkhuno 
simatikkantiko kathinuddhéro. bbikkhu atthatakathino ct- 
varam ádáya pakkamati paccessan ti, so bahisimagato tam 
civaram káreti, so kataotvaro pacoessam paccessan ti sambhu- 


VII. ё. 4-8. 2.] MAHÅVAGGA. 259 


pati kathinuddháram. (ама bhikkhuno eaba bhikkhühi 
kathinuddháro. 14161 


bhikkhu stthatakathino cfveram samádáys pakkemeti 
—pa— Ada yepakkamene várasadisam evam vitthåretabbam 
— la — bhikkhu atthatakathino vippakatacivaram Adáya 
pakkamati — la — samiddyapakkamanavdrasadiseam evam 
vitthåretabbam — la — bhikkhu atthatakathino vippakata- 
civaram samådåya pakkamati . . . (= ch. 6; read vippaka- 
tacivaram samådåys instead of civaram ådåye.) . . . saha 
bbhikkhühi kathinuddhéro. || 11/7 || 

Ad&yabhánaváram nitthitam. 


bhikkhu atthatakathino etvaråsåya pekkamati, во bahisima- 
gato tam civaråsam payirupAsati anåsåys labhati åsåya na 
labhati, tassa evam hoti: idh' ev’ imam civaram kåressam na 
pacoessan ti, во tam civaram káreti. tassa bhikkhuno nitthån- 
antiko kathinuddbåro. bhikkbu atthatakathino civaråsåys 
. . . tassa evam boti : n’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam na pa- 
ocessan ti. tassa bhikkhuno sannitthånantiko katbinuddhåro. 
. . » tassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam cfvaram kåressam na pa- 
ecesaan ti, 50 tam civaram kåreti, tassa tam civaram kayiramå- 
nam nassati. tasea bbikkhuno n&eanantiko katbinuddbåro. bhi- 
kkho atthatakethino clvar&sáya pakkamati, tassa bahistmaga- 
tassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civeråsam payirupåsissam na 
paccessan ti, во tam civarüsam payirupåsati, tassa så civaråså 
upaochijjati. tassa bhikkhuno åsåvacchediko kathinuddbåro. 
Will bhikkhu atthatakathino civaråsåya pakkamati na pa- 
ccessan ti, so bahisimagato tam civardsam payirupAsati 
anåsåya labhati åsåye na lebhati, tassa evam hoti: idb’ ev’ 
imam civaram kåressan ti, so tam civaram kåreti. tassa 
bhikkhuno nitthånantiko kathinuddháro. bhikkhu atthata- 
kethino . . . tassa evam hoti: n’ ev’ imam civaram kåressan 
ti. tasa bhikkhuno sannitthånantiko kathinuddháro . . 
tasea evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressan ti, so tam 
civaram kåreti, tassa tam civaram kayiramanam nassati. 
tama bhikkhuno násanantiko kathinuddbåro. bbikkbu attha- 
takathino civaråsåya pakkamati na pacceesan ti, tassa bahist- 


960 MaHAVAGGA. (VII. 8. 2-9. 2. 


magatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaråsam payirupñsissan 
ti, so tam civaråsam payirupåsati, tassa eå civaråså upecchi- 
jati. tassa bbikkhuno &sávacchediko kathinuddhåro. |2 |] 
bhikkhu atthatakathino civaråsåya pakkamati anadhitthitena, 
n’ ev’ assa hoti pacceesan ti, na pan’ assa hoti na paccessan 
ti, so babisimagsto tam civaråsam  payirupüsati anksñya 
labhati &såys па labhati, tassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam 
civaram kåressam па paccessan fi, so tam civaram kåreti. 
tassa bkikkhuno nitthånantiko kathinuddbåro . . . tassa evam 
hoti: n’ ev’ imam ctvaram kåressam na pacceeean ti. tassa 
bhikkhuno sannittbånantiko kethinuddbáro . . . tassa evam 
hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam na pacoeman ti, so 
tam civaram káreti, tassa tam civaram keyiramånam nassati. 
tassa bhikkhuno n&sanantiko kethinuddháro. bhikkhu attha- 
takathino civaråsåye pakkamati anadbitthitene, n’ ev’ assa 
hoti paccessan ti, na pan’ assa hoti na pacoessan ti, tassa 
bahieimagatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaråsam payir- 
upåsiesam na paccessan ti, so tam civarisam peyirupésati, tassa. 
ah civaråså upacchijjati, tassa bhikkhuno åsåvacchediko 
kathinuddhåro. |31181 
snåsådojesakam nitthitam. 


bbikkhu atthatakathino civardedya pakkamati paccessan ti, 
so bahisimagato tam civeråsam peyirupåsati åsåye labhati 
anåsåya na labhati, tassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram 
kåressam na paccessan ti, so tam civaram kåreti. tassa 
bbikkhuno nittbånentiko kathinuddhåro . . . tassa evam 
hoti: n’ ev’ imam civaram kåressan ne paccemsan ti. tassa 
bhikkhuno sannitthånantiko kathinuddhåro . . . tassa evam 
hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam па paccessan ti, во 
tam civaram káreti, tassa tam civaram kayiramånam nassati. 
tassa bhikkhuno nåsanantiko kathinuddháro. bhikkhu attha- 
takathino civeráshya pakkamati paccessan ti, tassa bahisi- 
magatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaråsam payirupå- 
sissam na paccessan ti, во tam civaråsam payirupåsati, tassa 
så civaråså upacchijjati. tassa bhikkhuno &såvacchediko 
kathinuddbáro. |11 bbikkhu atthatakathino ctvaråsåye 
pakkamati paccessan ti, so bahisimagato sup&ti: ubbhatam 


VII. 9. 2-3. MAHÁYAGGA. 961 


kira tasmim åvåse kathinen ti, tassa evam hoti: yato tasmim 
åvåse ubbhatam kathinam idh’ ev’ imam civaråsarp payirupå- 
sissan ti, во tam civaråsam payirupåsati åsåya labhati апёвдув 
na labhati, tassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam ns 
peocessan ti, so tam civaram kåreti. tassa bhikkhuno nitthån- 
antiko kathinoddhåro . . . tassa evam hoti: п’ ev’ imam 
civaram kåressam na paccessan ti. tassa bhikkhuno sanni- 
ttbånantiko kathinuddháro . . . tassa evam hoti: idh’ ev 
imam civaram káressam na pacoessan ti, so tam civaram 
kåreti, tassa tam cívaram kayiramånam  nassati. tassa 
bhikkbuno n&sanantiko katbinuddbåro. bhikkhu atthataka- 
thino civaråsåya pakkamati paccessan ti, so bahisimagato 
supAti: ubbhatam kira tasmim &vàse kathinan ti, tassa evam 
hoti: yato tasmim åvåse ubbbatam kathinam idh’ ev’ imam 
civarüsam peyirup&sissam ne paccessan ti, во tam civarüsam 
payirupåsati, tassa eå civaråså upacchijjati. tassa bhikkhuno 
ås vacchediko katbinuddbåre. ||2| bbikkhu atthatakathino 
civaråsåya pekkamati paccessan ti, so bahisimagato tam 
civarüsam payirupåsati ёздуа labhati anåsåya па labhati, so 
tam civaram kåreti, so katacivaro sunåti : ubbhatem kira 
tasmim åvåse kathinan ti. tassa bbikkbuno savanantiko 
kathinuddbåro. bhikkhu atthataketbino civaråsåya pakka- 
mati pacoessan ti, tassa behistmagatassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ 
imam civaråsam peyirupåsissam na paccessan ti, so tam 
civaråsam payirupåsati, tassa så civeråså upacchijjati. tassa 
bhikkhuno &aáveochediko katbinuddbåro. bhikkbu atthata- 
katbino civaråsåya pakkemati paccessan ti, so bahistmagato 
tam civaråsam payirupåsati åsåya labbati anüs&ya ра labheti, 
so tam civaram kåreti, so katacivaro paccessam paocessan ti 
babiddhé kathinuddhéram vitinåmeti. tassa bhikkhuno st- 
måtikksntiko kathinuddhåro. bhikkhu etthatakathino civar- 
Asdya pakkamati pecoessan ti, so behistmagate tam civarå- 
sam payirupásati ñañya labbati enüsáys ne labhati, so tam 
elvaram kåreti, so katacivaro paccessam paccessau ti sambhu- 
nati kathinuddbåram. ‘авза bhikkhuno saba bbikkhühi 
kathinuddbáro. 3191 
AsAdojasakam nitthitam. 


262 MAHÅVAGGA. (УЦ. 10. 1-3. 


bhikkhu atthatakethino kenacid eva karaniyens pakkamati, 
{азаа babisimagatassa civaråså uppajjati, eo tam civaråsam 
payirupåsati anåsåys labheti &s&ye na labhati, tama evam 
hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam па paccessan ti, во 
tam civaram kåreti. tassa bhikkhuno nittbånantiko kathi- 
nuddbåro . . . tassa evam hoti: п’ ev’ imam civaram kåre- 
ssam na paooessan ti. tassa bhikkhuno sannittbånantiko 
kathinuddhéro . . . tassa evam boti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram 
kåressam na paccessan ti, so tam civaram kåreti, {алаа tam 
civaram kayiramånam nasasti. tassa bhikkhuno nåsanantiko 
kathinuddháro. bhikkhu atthatakethino kenacid eva kara- 
niyena pakkamati, tassa behielmagataase civaråså uppajjati, 
tassa evam hoti : idh’ ev’ imam civarüsam payirupüsissam na 
pacoessan ti, so tam civaråsam payirupüsati, tasaa så clvaråså 
upacchijjati. tassa bhikkhuno &sávacchediko kathinuddhåro. 
ili bhikkhu etthatakathino kenacid eva karapiyena pa- 
kkamati na pacceasan ti, tassa bahisimagatassa olvarüsà 
uppajjati, so tam olvaråsam payirupAseti anåsåye labhati 
siya na labhati, tassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam otvaram 
kåressan ti, во tam civaram káreti, tassa bhikkhuno nitthån- 
antiko kathinuddháro . . . tasaa evam hoti: n’ ev’ imam civa- 
ram kåressan ti. tasa bhikkhuno sannitthånantiko katbinu- 
ddháro . .. tassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressan 
ti, so tam oivaram kåreti, tassa tam oivaram kayiramánam 
nasseti. tassa bhikkhuno nåsanantiko kethinuddbáro, bhi- 
kkhu atthatakathino kenacid eva karaniyena pakkamati na 
paccessan ti, tasea bahisimagatassa civarásá uppajjati, tassa 
evam hoti: idh’ ev’ imam ofvaråsam payirupåsissan ti, eo 
tam civaråsam payirupAsati, tassa så oivarüsá upacchijjati. 
tassa bhikkbuno åsåvsechediko kathinuddháro. |2 bhikkhu 
atthatakathino kenacid eva karaniyena pakkamati anadhitthi- 
tena, n’ ev’ assa hoti pacceszan ti, na pan’ assa hoti na paoce- 
sean ti, tassa bahistmagatessa civarésA uppajjati, so tam 
civarsam peyirupåsati andsiya labhati Asdya na labhati, 
tassa evam hoti : idb’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam na pacoe- 
asan ti, so tam civaram káreti. tassa bbikkhuno nitthånan- 
tiko kathinuddbéro . . . (алаа evam hoti: n’ ev’ imam 
civaram kAressam na paccessan ti. tassa bhikkhuno sanni- 


ҮП. 10. 3-11. 2.] MAHÅVAGGA. 263 


tthånantiko katbinuddhåro . . . tassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ 
imam ctvaram kåremsam па paccessan ti, во tam civaram 
kåreti, tassa tam civaram kayiramånam nassatL tamsa bhi- 
kkhuno nåsanantiko kathinuddháro. bhikkhu atthataksthino 
kenacid eva karaniyena pakkamati anadhitthitena, n’ ev’ assa 
hoti paccessan ti, na pan’ assa hoti na paccessan ti, tassa 
babisimagatassa civaråså uppejjati, tassa evam hoti: idh’ ev’ 
imam civaråsam payirupåsissam na peocceasan ti, во tam 
clvarüsam payirupåsati, tassa så olvarásá upacchijjati. tassa 
bhikkhuno &sávaochediko kathinuddháro. (13111011 
karaniyadojasakam nitthitam. 


bhikkhu atthatakathino disamgamiko pakkamati otvara- 
petivisam apscinayamáno, tam enam disamgstam bhikkhû 
puochanti: kaham tvam ávuso vassam vuttho kattha ca te 
civarapativiso "ti. so evam vadeti: amukasmim &váse vassam 
vuttho "mhi tattha ca me civarapativiso ti. te evam vadanti: 
gacohávuso tam civaram åhara, mayan te idhe civaram ka- 
rissåmå 'ti. во tam åvåsam gentvå bhikkhü pucohati: 
kaham me Avuso civarapativiso 'ti. te evam vadanti: ayan 
te Avuso civarapativiso, kaham gamissasiti. во evam vadeti : 
amukam nåms &vásar gamissåmi tattha me bhikkhü civaram 
karissantiti. te evam vadanti: alam ávuso må agamåsi, 
mayan te idha civaram karissåmå 'ti: tassa evam hoti: idh’ 
ev’ imam civaram kåressam na pacoemsan ti, so tam civaram 
kåreti. tasas bhikkhuno nitthånantiko kathinuddhåro. bhi- 
kkhu atthatakathino disamgamiko pekkamati — la — tasaa 
bhikkhuno sannittbånantiko kathinuddháro. bhikkbu ettha- 
takatbino disamgamiko pakkamati — la — tassa bhikkhuno 
nåsanantiko katbinuddhåro. 111 bbikkhu atthatakathino 
disamgemiko pakkamati oivarapativisam apacinayamáno .. 
ayan te Åvuso civarapativiso "ti. во tam civaram &dáya tam 
Айла gacchati, tam enam antarå magge bhikkhü puoch- 
enti: Avuso kaham gamissasith во evam vadeti: amukam 
nama åvåsam gamiss&mi, tattha me bhikkhü civaram ka- 
rissantiti. te evam vadanti: alam åvuso må agamási, mayan 
te idhe civaram karissåmå ”ti. tassa evar hoti: idh’ ev’ imam 
civaram kåressam na paccessan ti, so tam ofvaram káreti. 


264 MAHAVAGGA. [YIL 11. 2-13. 1. 


tassa bhikkhuno nitthånantiko kathinuddháro . . . tassa evam 
hoti: n’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam па peocessan tL tassa 
bhikkhuno sannitthånantiko ksthinuddbåro . . . idh’ ew 
imam civaram káressam na paocessen ti, so tam civaram 
kåreti, tassa tam civaram kayiramánam nassati. tassa bhi- 
kkhuno násanantiko kathinuddháro.||2| bbikkhu atthata- 
kathino disamgamiko pakkamati civaram apacinayamáno . . . 
ayan te åvuso civarspativiso 'ti. so tam civaram Аййуа tam 
Avüsam gacchati, tassa tam ávüsam gacchantassa evam hoti : 
idh’ ev’ imam civeram káressam na paccessan ti, во tam 
civaram kåreti. tassa bhikkhuno nitthànantiko kathin- 
uddháro . . . n' ev’ imam civaram kåressam ne pacoessan ti. 
tasaa bhikkhuno sannitthánantiko kathinuddhåro . . . idh* 
ev’ imam civaram kåressam na peocessan ti, во tam civaram 
kåreti, tassa tam civaram kayiram&nam nasssti. tassa bhi- 
kkhuno násanantiko kathinuddháro. ||3 11 | 
epacinanavakam nitthitam. 


bbikkhu atthatakathino phåsuvihåriko civaram ddAya 
pakkemati amukam nme Åvåsam gamissåmi, tattha me 
pbåsu bhavissati vasissåmi, no ce me phåsu bhavissati amu- 
kam nama åvåsem gamissåmi, tattha me pbåsu bhavissati 
vasisahmi, no ce me pháeu bhavissati amukam ойша åvåsam 
gamiesdmi, tattha me phåsu bhavissati vasissåmi, no ce me 
phüsu bhavissati paccessan ti. tassa bahisimagatassa evam 
hoti: idh’ ev’ imam civaram kåressam na paccessan ti, so 
tam civaram káreti tassa bhikkhuno nitthånantiko kethin- 
uddbáro.  bhikkhu atthatakathino phisuvihariko . . . pa- 
ccessan ti. tassa bahistmagatassa evam hoti: п’ ev’ imam 
civaram kåressam na paocessan ti. tassa bhikkhuno sanni- 
ftbånantiko katbinuddbåro. bhikkhu atthatakathino phásu- 
viháriko . . . paccessan ti. tassa bahisimagatassa evam 
hoti: idh’ ev’ imam ofvaram kåressam na peocessan ti, so 
tam civaram kårett, tassa tarn civaram kayiramånam namati. 
tasea bhikkhuno nåsauantiko kathinuddbåro. bhikkhu attha- 
takatbino phåsuvihåriko . . . paccessan ti so bahisimagato 
tam civaram kåreti, so katacivaro paocessam paoceesan ti 
bahiddbå kathinuddbåram vitindmeti. tassa bhikkhuno at- 


ҮП. 18. 1-13. 2.] MAHÅVAGGA. 265 


måtikkantiko kathinuddhåro. bbikkhu atthatakathino phå- 
suvihåriko . . . paccessan ti. so bahistmagato tam civaram 
kåreti, so kataclvaro paocessam paccessan ti sambhupAti 
kathinuddbåram. tassa bhikkhuno saha bhikkhühi kathin- 
uddháro. 1111121 

phéásuvihárapsfücakam nitthitam. 


dve "me bhikkhave kathinassa palibodhå dve apalibodhå. 
katame ca bhikkhave dve kathinagsa palibodhá, åvåsapali- 
bodho са civarapalibodho ca. kathafi ca bhikkhave AvAsa- 
palibodho hoti. idha bhikkhave bhikkhu vaseati vAtasmim 
Avüse såpekkbo vå pakkamati paccessan ti. evam kho 
bhikkheve åvåsapalibodho hoti. kathafi ca bhikkhave civara- 
pelibodho hoti. idha bhikkhave bhikkhuno civaram akatam 
vå hoti vippaketam vå civaråså vå anupeochinnå. evam kho 
bbikkheve civarapalibodho hoti. ime kho bhikkhave dve 
kathinasss palibodbå. [|11 katame oa bhikkhave dve kathi- 
nassa spalibodhå. åvåsaapalibodho ca civaraapelibodho ca. 
kathaii ca bhikkhave Av&saapalibodho hoti. idha bhikkhave 
bhikkhu pakkamati tamhå åvåså cattena vantena muttens 
anapekkhena na peooessan ti. evam kho bbikkhave åvåsa- 
apalibodho hoti. kathañ ca bhikkhave civaraapalibodho 
hoti. idha bhikkhave bhikkhuno civaram katam vå hoti 
nattham vå vinattham và daddham vå cívarüaà và upacchi- 
nna. evam kho bhikkhave civaraapalibodho hoti. ime kho 
bhikkhave dve kathinassa apalibodhå "ti. 1211811 

kathinekkhandhakam settamem. 


imemhi khandheke vatthu дојава, peyy&lemnkháni ekasa- 

tam atthárasa, tassa uddånam: 

timsa Patheyyaké bhikkhà Saket’ ukkenthitå vasum 

vassam vutth’ okapunpebi agamum jinadassanam.| 

idarn vatthurn kathinassa, kappiyan ti ca paficakà : 

anåmantå алашйсАгА tath’ eva ganabbojanam | 

yåvadatthafi ca uppådo atthatánam bhavissati. 

flatti ev’ atthatafi с’ eva, evañ o' eva anatthatam.| 

ullikhi dhované о’ eva vicåranam са chedanam 

bandhan’ ovatti Карди ca da|hikamm"-ånuvåtikå | 


266 MAHAVAGGA. 


paribhandam ovatteyyam maddané nimitta-kathå 

Б kukku sannidhi nissaggi n’ akapp’ aññatra te tayo | 
aññatra paficåtireke safichinnena samandali 
na aññatra puggalå, sammå nissimettbo anumodati,| 
kathinam anatthatam hoti evam buddhena desitam. 
abat’-Akappa-piloti-pameu-papanikéya ca | 
animitt'-Aparikathà akukko asannidhi ca 
anissaggi kappakate tathå tici varena ca | 
paficake våtireke và ohinna-samandalikste 
puggalass’ atthårå, sammå simattho anumedati.| 
evam kethinattherapam.  ubbhárass' atthe måtikå: 

10 pakkamananti nitthánam sannitthánafi ca nåsanam | 
eavanam åsåvacchedi stmå eaubbhar’ attbami. 
katacivaram ådåya ов pacoessan ti gacchati,| 
tassa tam kathinuddhåro hoti pakkamanantiko. 
ådåya civaram yåti nissime idha cintayi | 
kåressam na рассеваап ti nittháne kethinuddháro. 
Adaya nissimam n’ eva па pacoessan timånaso | 
tassa tam kathinuddháro sannitthánantiko bhave. 
Adaya civaram уйй niasime idha cintayi | 
kåressam na paccessan ti kayiram tassa nassati, 

15 tassa tam kathinuddháro bhavati n&sanentiko.| 
Adaya yåti paccessam bahi káreti civaram 
civarakato sunåti ubbhatam kathinam tahim,| 
tassa tam kathinuddháro bhavati savanantiko, 
Adaya yåti paccessam bahi kåreti civaram | 
katacivaro behiddhé nåmeti kathinuddháram, 
tassa tam kathinuddbåro eimåtikkantiko bhave.| 
&d&ya yåti paocessam bahi kåreti civaram 
katacivaro paccessam sambhoti kathinuddh&ram,| 
tassa tam kathinuddhéro saha bhikkhühi jåyeti. 

20 &dåye samádàye ca sattassttavidhi gati.| 
pakkamanantikå n’ atthi ohaocá vippakatá gati. 
ådåye nissimagatam kåressam iti jåyati | 
nittbånam sannittbånafi ca n&canafi ca ime tayo. 
ådåye na paccessan ti bahisime karomiti | : 
nitthánam sannitthånem pi nüsanam pi idam tayo. 
anadhifthitens n’ ev’ assa hettha tini nay& vidhi.| 


MAHAVAGGA. 267 


ådAya yåti paccessam bahisime karomiti 

na paccessan ti kåreti, nittháne katbinuddhåro | 

sannitthánam пАвапвй ca savana-simátikkamá 
25 saha bhikkhühi jåyetha, evam pannarasam дабі. | 

samádáya, vippakatå, samådåya рип tathå, 

ime te caturo vårå sabbe pannarass vidhi.| 

anásáya ca, dsdya, karantyo са te tayo, 

naysto tam vijáneyya tayo dvådasa-dvådess.| 

apacinanå nav’ ettha, phásu paficavidhå tahim, 

palibodh'-üpalibodhá, uddAnam nayato katan ti. 


MAHAVAGGA. 


ҮШ. 


Tena samayena buddho bbagavå Råjagahe viharati 
Veluvane Kelandskanivåpe. tena kho рапа вашауепа 
Vesåli 144ҺА с’ eva hoti pbitå ca bahujenå &ákippamanussá, 
subhikkhå ca, satta ca påsådasshassåni satta ca рАлАдава(Ал1 
satta са påsådå satta ca kåtågårasahassåni satta са kråtågå- 
rasatåni satta ca köÖtågåråni satta ca &rümasahassni sata са 
åråmasatåni satta ca Arama satta са pokkharapisahassáni sata 
ca pokkharantsatåni satta са pokkharaniyo. Ambapålikå 
ganiké abhirüpà hoti dassaniyA påsådikå paramåya vanne- 
pokkbaratåya samannágatà pedskkhipå nacce са gite ca 
vådite ca ebhisstå atthikánam-atthikánam manusAnam 
pañññañya са rattim gacchati {Ауа ca Vesåli bhiyyosoma- 
ttåya upasobhati. |l] atha kho Råjegahako negamo Veså- 
lim agamåsi kenacid eva kerapiyene. addasa kho Råjagahako 
negamo Vesålim iddham са phitam ca behujanam &kingama- 
nussam subhikkharp ca satta ca påsådasabessåni . . . satta са 
pokkharaniyo Ambapålim ca ganikam abhirüpam dassantyam 
påsådikam . . . upasobhitan ti. atha kho Råjagahako ne- 
gamo Vesüliyam tam karaniyam tiretvå punad eva Rájaga- 
ham paocágaochi, yena råjå Mågadho Beniyo Bimbisåro 
ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå гајёпет Magadham Seni- 
yam Bimbisåram etad avocs: Vesålt deva iddhå ca phitå ca 
. + + upasobhati sddhu deva mayam pi ganikam vutthå- 
peyyåmå 'ti. tena hi bhane tAdisim kumårim jandhi 
yam tumbe ganikam vutthåpeyyåthå 'ti. [2] tena kho 
pana samayena Rájegahe Sélavati nåma kumari abhiråpå 
hoti даввапїуй påsådikå paramfys vanpspokkharatáya eama- 
nnågatå. athe kho Rájagehako negamo Sålavatim kumarim 


VIII. 1. 3-6.] MAHÁVAGGA, 269 


ganikam vutthápesi, atha kho Sálavatt ganika na cirass’ eva 
padakkhinå ehosi naoce ca gite са vüdite ca abhisatA atthikü- 
nam-atthikánam menuesånam patisatena ca rattim gacchati. 
atha kho Sålavati ganikå na cirass’ eva gabbhint ahosi. atha 
kho Sálavatiyá ganikaya etad ahosi: itthi kho gabbhint puriså- 
nam emanépå. васе mam kooi jånissati Sålavatt ganika 
gabbhiniti sabbo me eakkåro parihåyissati. yam nindham 
gilånå 'ti pativedeyyan ti. atha kho Sålavati ganikA dovà- 
rikam ApApesi: må bhane dovårika koci puriso pávisi, yo ca 
mam pucchati gilånå 'ti pstivedebiti. evam ayye "ti kho so 
dovåriko Sålavatiyå ganikåya peccassosi. |3|| atha kbo 
Sålavati gapik& tassa gabbbassa peripåkam anvåys puttam 
vijáyi atha kho Sålavati ganikå dásim ånåpesi: handa je 
imam dårakam kettarasuppe pakkhipitvå niharitvà samkára- 
kåte chaddehiti. evam ayye 'ti kho ей dási Sålavatiyå 
ganikAya patisunitvå tam dárekam kattarasuppe pakkhipitvå 
nibaritvå samkáraküte chaddesi. tena kho pena samayena 
Abhsyo nama rüjekum&ro kélass’ eva råjupatthånam 
gacchanto addas& tam dårakam kákehi samparikippam, dis- 
våna manusse puochi kim etam bhane kåkehi samparikinnan 
ti. dáreko devå 'ti. jivati bhane 'ti. jivati devå "ti. tena 
hi bhane tam dárakam ambåkarn antepuram netvå dhåtinam 
detha posetun ti. evam деу 'ti kho te manusså Abhayasea rAja- 
kumårassa patisunitvá tam dårakam Abbayassa rájakumárassa 
antepuram netvå dbåtinam edamsu posethå ”ti. tassa jivatiti 
Jivako ‘ti nåmam akamsu, kumárena posåpito "ti Komára- 
bhacoo 'ti nåmam akamsu. |!4 || 

athe kho Jivako Komárabhacco na cirass' eva viññu- 
tam pápupi. atha kho Jivako Komårabhaceo yene Abhayo 
råjakumåro ten’ upasamkami, upasamkemitvà Abhayam 
råjakumåram etad avoca: kA me дета måtå ko pitå 'ti. 
aham pi kho te bhane Jiveka måtaram na jånåmi, api 
cAham te рі, maylpi posåpito 'ti. atha kho Jivakassa 
Komårabhaceasss etad ahosi: imáni kho råjakulåui na 
sukaràui asippena upsjivitum. уаш nånåbam sippam 
sikkheyyan ti. tena kho pana samayena Takkasiláyam 
disåpåmokkho vejjo pativasati. |51 atba kho Jivako Komå- 
rabbaceo Abhayam rájekumáram an&üpucch& yena Takkesilå 


970 MAHAVAGGA. [YITL 1. 6-а. 


tena pakkAmi, anupubbene yena Takkasilå yena so vejjo ten’ 
upesamkami, upesamkamitvA tam vejjam etad avoca: iochåm” 
sham ácariya sippam sikkhitun ti. tens hi bhane Jivaka 
sikkhassü ‘ti, atha kho Jivako Komårabbacco bebum ca 
ganhåti lahom ca gapbåti sutthum ca upadbáreti gahitam 
с’ asss na pamusasti. atha kho Jivakasm Komárabhaccasse 
sattannam vassånam accayena etad аһовї: aham kho bahum 
са ganhåmi Jahum ca gaphámi sutthum ca upadháremi ga- 
hitam ca me na pamussati satta ca me vassåni edhiyantassa 
na yimassa sippassa anto pafifidyati, kadA imassa sippassa 
anto peüfi&yissatiti. 161 atha kho Jivako Komárabhacoo 
yena so vejjo ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvà tam vejjam 
etad evoca: sham kho Acariya behum ca ganbåmi lahum ca 
ganhåmi suttbum са upedhåremi gahitam ca me na pamuseati 
satta ca me vassåni adbiyantassa na yimassa sippassa anto 
paññáyati, kadå imassa sippassa anto pafifiAyinsatiti. tena 
hi bhage Jivaka khanittim Adaya Takkesilåya samantå 
yojanam ábipdanto yam kifici abhesajjam passeyyåsi tam 
&hará ti, evam åcariyå 'ti kho Jivako Komfrabhacco tasa 
vejjasea patisunitvå khanittim &dàya Takkasilâya samantà 
yojanam &hipdanto na kiñci abhesajjam addam. atha kho 
divako Komårabhacco yens so vejjo ten’ upasamkami, upa- 
samkemitvå tam vejjam etad avoca: åhindanto 'mhi &cariya 
Takkasilåya samantå yojanam, ne kifloi ebhessjjam sddasan 
ti. sikkhito 'si bhage Jivaka, alan te ettakam jivikáyá 'ti 
Jivakassa Komárebhaccasss parittam pátheyyam pådåsi. 71 

atha kho Jivako Komársbhacco tam parittam påtbeyyam 
ådåya yena Rájagaham tene pakküámi. atha kho Jivakaesa 
Komårabhaccassa tam perittam pátheyyam antará шарре 
Såkete parikkhayam agamási. atha kho Jivakassa Komå- 
rabhaccassa etad ahosi: ime kho maggå kantårå appodakå 
eppsbhakkh& na sukará spåtheyyene gentum, yam nün&bam 
pátheyyam pariyeseyyan ti. tena kho pana eamayena Såkete 
eetthibhariyfya sattavassiko sisåbådho hoti, behü mahantå 
-mehanté disåpåmokkhå vejjå ågantvå násakkhimsu årogam 
k&tum, bahum hiraññam üdáys agamamsu. aths kho Jivako 
Komårabhaoco Såketam pavisitv’ manusse pucchi: ko bhape 
gilåno kam tikioobåmiti. etieså dcariya setthibhariyáya 


VIII. 1. 6-12.) MAHÁYAGOA. 271 


sattavamsiko sleAbadho, gaccha åcariya setthibhariyam tiki- 
echabiti. 181 atha kho Jivako Komårabhacoo yena setthissa 
gahspatiesa nivesanam ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå 
dovårikam ApApesi: gaccha bhane dovárika, setthibhariyåya 
pávade, vejjo ayye ågato so tam datthukåmo 'ti. evam 
&cariyå "ti kho so dovåriko Jivekassa Komårabhaceaøsa pati- 
CAE ten’ umwmcWOTi, upasamkamitvå 
setthibbariyam etad avoca: vejjo ayye ågato во tam datthu- 
kAmo 'ti. kídiso bhane dovårika vejjo 'ti. daharako ayye 
"і. alam bhane dovårika, kim me daharako vejjo karissati. 
bahü mabanté-mahanta disåpåmokkhå vejjå ågantvå nåsa- 
kkhimsu drogam kåtum, bahum hirsiiflam ådåye sgamamså ' ti. 
191 atha kho во dovåriko yene Jivako Komérabhacco ten’ 
upesamkami, upasamkamitvå Jivakam Komárabhaocam otad 
&voca : settbibhariyå &cariya evam dha: alam bbane dovårika 
+ + agamams ’ti. gaccha bhane dovarika, setthibbariyåye 
páveda: vejjo ayye evam aha: må kir’ ayye pure kiñci adåsi, 
yadå årogå sahosi, tadà yam iccheyyüsi tam dujjeyyåsiti. 
evam åcariyå "ti kho во dovåriko Jivakassa Komårabhaccassa 
patisunitvà yena settlibbariyå ten’ upasamkami, upasam- 
kamitvå setthibhariyam etad avoca: vejjo ayye evam dha 
- + . tam dajjeyyásiti tena hi bhane dovárika vejjo ågacch- 
вій "ti. evam ayye 'ti kho so dovåriko setthibhariyáya 
patisunitvé yena Jivako Komárabhacco ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitva Jivakam Komårabhaccam etad evoca : setthi- 
bhariy& tam ёсагіуа pakkosatiti. |101 athe kho Jivako 
Komérabhacco yena setthibhariy& ten’ upasamkami, upasam- 
kamitvå setthibhariyáya vikåram sallakkhetva setthibhariyam 
etad avoca: pasatena ayye sappinå attho ‘ti. atha kho 
setthibhariyá Jivakassa Komürabhaccassa passtam варріта 
dápesi. stha kho Jivako Komárabhacoo tam pasatam sappi 
nånåbhessjjebi nippacitvå setthibhariyam maficake uttånam 
Dipejj&petvà natthuto adási, atha kho tam sappi natthuto 
dinnam mukhato uggacchi. atha kho setthibhariy& patiggahe 
nutthuhitvà dásim åpåpesi: handa je imam sappim picunå 
ganbåhiti. [11 atha kho Jivakasss Komårabhaccassa etad 
ahosi : acohariyam yåva låkhåyam gbharapi yatra hi nåme 
imam ohaddantyadhammam sappim picunå gåbåpessati, bahu- 


279 mManivacca. [YIL L 13-14. 


kåni ca me mahaggháni-mshagghábi bhesajjáni upegatáni, 
kim pi m’ åyam kiüci deyyadhammam dasaatiti. atha kho 
setthibhariyà Jivakossa Komérabhaccassa vikåram salla- 
kkhetvå Jivakam Komérabhaccam etad avoca: kissa {та 
Acariya vimano 'siti. idha me etad ahosi: acchariyam yåva 

. . dassatiti. mayam kho åcariya agårikå nama opsjånåm” 
etassa samyamesas, varam etam sappi dåsånam và kamma- 
karånam và pådabbhafljenam vå padipakarape và dsittam. 
må {уаш Åcariya vimano ahosi, na te deyyadhammo hhyissa- 
titi. [19] atha kho Jivako Komárabhacco metthibhariyåya 
sattavassikam sisåbådham eken’ eva natthukammens apa- 
kaddhi. atha kho setthibhariyå årogå samånå Jivakeses 
Komårabhaceassa cattåri sahaseåni pådåsi, putto mith me 
årogå thité ’ti cattåri ваһаваёпі pådåsi, suniså вавай me årogå 
thità "ti oattåri sahassåni pådåsi, setthi gahapati bhariyá me 
Arogá thitå "ti cattåri sahassåni pådåsi dåsam ca dåsim са 
asaaratham ca. atha kho Jivako Komårabhacco tåni soļass 
sahassáni ådåye dásam ca dåsim ca assaratham ca yena 
Råjageham tena pakkåmi, anupubbena yena Råjagaham 
yena Abhayo råjakumåro ten’ npasamkami, upasamkamitvå 
Abhayam råjakumåram etad avoca: idam me deva pathama- 
kammam sojasa sshassáni dåso са dási са assaratho ca, pati- 
ganhåtu me devo posdvanikan ti. alam bhane Jtvaka tuyh’ 
eva hotu, amháükafi fieva antepure nivesanam mapehiti. evam 
devå 'ti kho Jivako Komårabhaoco Abhsyassa råjakumårssm 
patisunitvå Abhayassa r&jakuméárassa antepure nivesanam 
måpesi. |} 13} 

tena kho pana samayena гаййо Mågadbassa Seniyesss 
Bimbisárassa bhagsndalåbådho hoti, såtakå lohitens 
makkhiyanti. deviyo dievå uppandenti utuni dåni devo, 
puppham devassa uppannam, na cirass’ eva devo vijå- 
yissatiti. tene rájà manku hoti. atha kho råjå Mågadho 
Seniyo Bimbisåro Abhayam råjakumåram etad атоса: 
mayham kho bhape Abhaya tådiso åbådho: såtakå lohitens 
makkhiyanti, deviyo mam disvå uppandenti . . . Vijdyinsatiti. 
ifigha bhane Abhaya tådisam vejjam jånåhi yo mam tiki- 
соһеууё ”ti. ayam deve embåkam Jivako vejjo tarupo 
bhadrako, so devam tikicchissatiti. tena hi bhane Abhays 


VIIL 1. 14-17.) MAHÅVAGGA. 273 


Jivakam vejjam ånåpehi, во mam tikiochissatiti. 1141 atha 
kho Abhayo råjakumåro Jivakam Komårabhaccam ёпАреві : 
gaocha bhane Jivaka råjånam tikicchåbiti. evam devå 'ti 
kho Jivako Komérabhecco Abhayassa råjekumårassa patisu- 
nitvå nakhens bhessjjam ådåya yena råjå Mågadho Seniyo 
Bimbisåro ten’ upssamkemi, upasamkamitvå råjånam Må- 
gadham Seniyam Bimbisåram etad avoca: åbådham deva 
passim’ "ti. atha kho Jivako Komárabhaoco гаййо Mágadh- 
аза Seniyassa Bimbisårassa bhagandalåbådham eken’ eva 
ålepens apekaddhi. atha kho råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbi- 
såro årogo samåno райса itthisståni sabbålamkåram bhüsá- 
petvå omuficåpetvå pufijam kåråpetvå Jivakam Komåra- 
bhacoam etad avoca: etam bhane Jivaka paficannam itthisa- 
{Апат sabbålamkåram tuyham hot "ti. alam deva adbikåram 
me devo saratå 'ti. tena hi bhane Jivaka mam upetthaha 
itthågåram са buddbapemukbam bhikkhusamgbam cå "ti. 
evam devå 'ti kho Jivako Komérabhacco гаййо Mågadhassa 
Seniyessa Bimbisårassa paccassosi. || 15 || 

tena kho pana samayena Råjagahaksess setthissn satta- 
vassiko sisåbådho hoti, bahü mahantá-mahantá disåpåmokkhå 
vejjå &gantv& nåsakkhimsu årogam kåtum, babum hiraññam 
Adaya agamamsu. api ca vejjehi paccakkhåto hoti, ekacce 
vejjå evam áhamsu : paflcamam divasam setthi gahapati kå- 
lam karissatiti, ekavce vejjå evam Abamsn: sattamam 
divasam setthi gahapati kAlam karissatiti. atha kho Rå- 
jagabakassn negamasea etad ahosi: ayam kho setthi 
gabapati bahûpakåro гаййо о’ eva negamasea са, api ca 
vejjebi peccakkháto, ekacce vejjá evam &hamsu: paficamam 
divasam setthi gahapeti kAlam karissatiti, ekacce vejjå evam 
&hameu: sattamam divasam setthi gahapati Кат karissattti, 
syam ca rañño Jivako vejjo taruno bhadrako, yam nüna 
mayam råjånam Jivakam vejjam уйсеууйша setthim gaba- 
patim tikicohitun ti. |161 athe kho Råjagahako negamo 
yena råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro ten’ upasamkami, 
upassmkamitvå råjånam Mágadham Seniyam Bimbisåram 
etad avoca: ayam deva setthi gahapati bahåpakåro devassa 
c’ eva negamassa ca, api са vejjehi paccakkhåto . . . karissa- 
titi, s&dbu devo Jivakam vejjern ånåpetu setthim gahapatim 


You. m. 18 


974 MABAVaGGA. pn. 1. 17-19 


tikicchitun ti. atha kho råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro 
Jivakam Komårabhacoam ágápeei: gaccha bhane Jivaka 
setthim gahapatim tikiccbåbiti. evam devå ’ti kho Jivako 
Komårabhacco rafifio Magadhassa Seniyassa Bimbisårasea 
patisunitvå yena setthi gahapati ten’ upasamkami, upasamka- 
mitvå вебћівва gahapatissa vikåram sallakkbetvå setthim 
gabapatim etad avoea : вас’ Aham tam gahapeti årogåpeyyam 
kim me азва deyyadhammo 'ti. aabbam såpateyyam са te 
åcariya hotu aham са te dåso 'ti. |171 sakkhissasi pana 
{хаш gahapati ekena passene satta måse nipajjitun ti 
eakkom’ aham ёсагіув ekena passena satta måse nipajjitun ti. 
sakkhissasi pana уаш gahapeti dutiyena passena satta mise 
nipajjitun ti. sakkom’ aham &cariya dutiyena passens satta 
måse nipajjitun ti. sakkhissasi pana іта gahepati uttåno 
eatta máse nipajjitun ti. sakkom' aham åcariya uttåno вайа 
måse nipajjitun ti. atha kho Jivako Komårabhacoo setthim 
gahspatim maiicake nipsjjåpetvå maficake sambandhitvå 
sisacchavim upphåletvå sibbinim vinåmetvå dve pápake nfha- 
ritvå janasss dassesi: passath’ ayyo іше dve püpake ekam 
khuddakam ekam mahallakam. уе te åcariyå evam åbamsu : 
paficamam divasam setthi gahapati kAlam kariseatiti teh’ 
Ayam mahallako panako dittho, paficamam divasam setthisea 
gahapatiesa matthalungam  pariyádiyiesati, matthalungaesa 
pariyådånå setthi gahapati k&lam karissati, sudittho tehi 
&cariyehi. ye te åcariyå evam &hamsu: sattamam divasam 
setthi gahapati kålam karissatiti teh’ Ayam khuddako pånako 
dittho, sattamam divasam setthissa gahapatiesa matthaluigam 
periyüdiyissati, matthalungasss pariyådånå setthi gahepeti 
kålam karissati, eudittho tehi Acariyehiti, sibbinim sampati- 
pådetvå sisacchavim sibbetvå ålepam edasi. ||18|| atha kho 
setthi gahapeti sattåhasas accayena Jivakam Komårabhaceam 
etad avoca: ndham åcariys eakkomi ekena passena вайа miso 
nipejjitun ti. nanu me tvam gahapati patisupi sakkom” 
aham åcariye ekena passena satia máse nipajjitun ti. eaocá- 
ham Acarjya patisupim, ap’ dham marissámi, náham sakkomi 
ekena passena «atta тёзе nipajjitun ti. tene hi tvam gaba- 
pati dutiyena passena satta mise nipajjåbiti. etha kho setthi 
gahapati sattáhassa accayena Jivakam KomArabhaccam etad 


ҮШ. 1. 19-21.] MAHÂVAGGA. 275 


evoca: nåham åcariya sakkomi dutiyena passena satte mise 
nipajjitun ti nanu me tvam gahapati patisupi sakkom' 
aham åcariya dutiyena pessena satta måse nipajjitun ti. 
ssccábam åcsriya patisunim, вр’ áham marissåmi, n&ham 
Acariya sakkomi dutiyena passena вайа måse nipajjitun ti. 
tena hi (тет gahapeti uttåno satta mse nipajjåhiti. atha kho 
setthi gahapati satt&hassa accayena Jivakam Komårabhaccam 
etad evoca: påham Асапуа eakkomi uttåno вайа mise 
nipajjitun ti. nanu me tvam gahapati patisupi sakkom' aham 
ácariya uttåno satta måse nipajjitun ti. saocáham Åcariya 
patisunim, ap’ áham marise&mi, náham sakkomi uttåno satta 
måse nipajjitun ti. |19|] aham ce tam gahapati na va- 
deyyam ettakam pi tvam na nipajjeyyási, api ca patigaco’ 
eva maya fiåto tibi satt&hehi setthi gahapati årogo bhavisea- 
titi. ut¢hehi gahapati Arogo 'si, jånåhi kim me deyya- 
dhammo 'ti. sabbam såpateyyam са te ёсагіув hotu saham ca 
te dåso "і. alam gahapati må me tvam sabbar såpateyyam 
adåsi må ca me dåso, гаййо satassbassam dehi mayham sata- 
eabassan ti. atha kho setthi gabapati årogo samåno гаййо 
matasahassam айАзї Jivakassa Komårabhaocassa satasaha- 
ssam. [201 

tena kbo pans samayens Bårånaseyyskessa ecetthi- 
puttasse mokkhacikåye kijantassa antaganthüb&dho hoti yena 
yågu pi pità na sammüparinümam gaochati bhattam pi 
bhuttam na sammåparipåmarm gacchati uccáro pi passávo pi 
na paguno. so tena kiso hoti lükho dubbanno uppanduppa- 
ndukajáto dhemenisanthatagatto. atha kho Bárünaseyya- 
kassa setthisse etad ahosi: mayham kho puttassa kidiso 
&büdho. yágu pi pitå па sammáparipámam gaceheti bhattam 
pi bhottam na sammáparipámam gacchati uccáro pi passåvo 
pi na pagupo, so tena kiso lükho dubbanno uppanduppandu- 
kajáto dhamanisanthatagatto. yam nün&ham Rájagaham 
gantvå råjånam Jivakam vejjam yåoeyyam puttam me tiki- 
echitun ti atha kho Bårånaseyyako setthi Råjegaham 
gantvå yens råjå Mågadho Seniyo Bimbieüro ten’ upasam- 
kami, upasamkamitvå råjånam Magadham Seniyam Bimbisá- 
ram etad avoca: mayham kho deva puttassa tådiso Abådho: 
yågu pi... dhamsnisanthatagatto. sådhu devo Jivakam 


976 MAHÁVAGGA. (VIII. 1, 21-24. 


vejjam åpåpetu puttam me tikicchitun ti. ||211 atha kho 
råjå Mágadho.Seniyo Bimbisåro Jivakem Komársbhaccam 
AnApesi: g&coha bhape Jivaka B&rdnasim gantva Bårånu- 
seyyakam setthiputtam tikicchåhtti. evam devå "ti kho 
Jivako Komársbhacoo rañño Mågadhassa Seniyassa Bimbi- 
sÁrassa patisunitvå Båråpasim gantvå yena Bårånaseyyako 
setthiputto ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvA Bårånsseyya- 
kassa setthiputtassa vikAram sallakkbetvå janam ussåretvå 
tirokareniyam parikkhipitvå thambhe ubbandhitva bhariyam 
purato thapetvå udaracchavim uppháletvà antaganthim niba- 
ritvå bhariy&ya dassesi passa te sÁmiksssa dbádham, iminå 
yågu pi pité ns sammáparinhmam gacchati bhattam pi 
bhuttam na sammáparipámam gacchati uccáro pi passåvo pi 
na paguno, iminåyam kiso lükho dubbanno uppanduppandu- 
kajåto dhamanisanthatagatto ‘ti, antaganthim vinivethetvå 
antåni patipavesetvå udaracchavim sibbetvå ülepam adåsi. 
atha kho Bårånaseyyako setthiputto na cirass’ eva árogo 
ahosi. etha kho Bårånaseyyako setthi putto me drogo thito 
"ti Jtvakessa Komårabhaccassa во]ава sabassåni pådåsi. atha 
kho Jivako Komårabhacoo (апі војаза sahassåni Adaya punad 
eva Rajagaham paocágacohi. || 22 || 

tena kho pane samayena rafiåo Pajjotasea panduro- 
gåbådho hoti.  bahü mahantå - mahantá disåpåmokkhå 
vejjå ágantvà nåsakkhimsu årogam kåtum, bahum biraññam 
Adaya agamamsu. atha kho råjå Pajjoto таййо Måga- 
dhasaa Seniyassa Bimbisårassa santike dütam рёһеві : 
mayham kho tådiso åbådho, sådhu devo  Jivakam 
vejjam ånåpetu, so mam tikicchissatiti. atha kho råjå 
Mågadho Seniyo Bimbisåro Jivakam Komårabhaccam 
ånåpesi: gaccha bhane Jivaka Ujjenim gantvå råjånarm 
Pajjotam tikicchåhtti. evam дета 'ti kho Jivako Komåra- 
bhacco rafifio Magadhassa Seniyassa Bimbisårases patisunitvå 
Ujjenim gantvå yena råjå Pajjoto ten’ upasamkami, upasam- 
kamitvå rafifio Pajjotassa vikåram sallekkhetvà r&jáànam 
Pajjotam etad avoca: ||23|| варріл deva nippacissåmi, tam 
devo pivissattti alam bhane Jivaka yam te sakkå vink 
sappinå Årogam kåtum tam karohi, jegucobam me sappi 
petikkülan ti. atha kho Jivakassa Komürabhaccassa etad 


VIIL 1. 24-27.) MAHÅVAGGA. 277 


abosi : imasss kho raüfio tådiso åbådho na sakkå vind sappind 
årogam kåtum. yam nün&ham sappim nippaceyyam kaså- 
vavannam kasåvagandham kasåvarasan ti. atha kho Jivako 
Komárabhacoo nånAbhessjjehi sappim nippaci kasivavannam 
kasávagandham kasåvarasam. atha kho Jivakasss Komára- 
bhaccassa etad ahosi: imassa kho rañño sappi pitam parip&- 
mentam uddekam dassati. cand’ åyam гаја ghåtåpeyyåsi 
mam. yam nünáham patigacc’ eva Apuccheyyan ti. atha 
kho Jivako Komårabhacco yena raja Pajjoto ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå rájáuum Pajjotam etad avoca: ||24|| mayam 
kho deva vejjå náma tádisena muhuttens müláni uddharáma 
bhesajjáni samharáme. sådhu devo våhanågåresu ca dvåresu 
са Ap&petu: yena váhanena Jivako icchati tena vühanena 
gacchatu, yena dvårena iccheti tena dvárena gacchatu, yam 
kAlam icchati tam kålam gacchatu, yam kålam icohati tam 
kAlam pevisatü 'ti. atha kho råjå Pajjoto våhanågåresu са 
dvåresu ca &pápesi: yena våhanens Jivako icchati tena 
våhanena gsochatu, yena dvårens icchati tena dvdrena ga- 
echatu, yam kålam icchati tam kålam gacchatu, yam kålam 
icohati tam k&lam pavisatü 't tena kho pena samayens 
refiflo Pajjotassa Bhaddevatiká nåma hatthinik& pafifidsayo- 
janiké hoti. atha kho Jivako Komarabhacoo rafifio Pajjotassa 
sappim upanåmesi kasávam devo pivatü'ti. atha kho Jivako 
Komårabhacoo råjånam Pajjotam sappim påyetvå hatthisdlam 
gantvå Bhaddavstikåya Lhatthinikàya nagarsmbå nippati. 
25 || афа kho таййо Pajjotassa tam варрі pitam 
paripimentam uddekam edåsi. atha kho råjå Paijjoto 
manume otad avoca: dutthena bhane Jivakena sappim påyito 
'mhi. tena hi bhane Jivakam vejjam vicinathé ‘ti. Bhadda- 
vatikåya deva hatthinikéya nagaramhá nippatito "ti. tena 
kho pana samayens rafifio Pejjotasss Kåko nåma dåso 
satthiyojaniko hoti amanussena paticca jåto. atha kho råjå 
Pajjoto Kåkam далат AnApesi: gaccha bhene Kaka Jivakam 
vejjam nivattehi råjå tam &cariya nivattåpetiti ete kho 
bhane Kaka vejjå n&ma bahumåyå, må с’ assa kifici patigga- 
hesiti. 1261 atha kho Kako dáso Jivakam Komársbheocam 
antarå magge Kossmbiyam sambhávesi påtaråsam karon- 
tam. atha kho Kako dåso Jivekam Komárabhaccam etad 


978 MAHÅVAGGA. (VIII. 1. 27-30. 


avoos: råjå tam Acariya pivattåpetiti. ågamehi bhane Kaka 
yåva bhufljåma, handa bhane Кака bhufljasst "ti. alam 
Acariya гайй' ambi ånatto: ete kho bhane Kaka vejjá піша 
bahumåyå må о’ assa kifici patiggahesiti. tena kho рапа 
eamayena Jivako Komårabhacco nakhens bhesajjam olam- 
petvå &malakam ca khádeti pániyam ca pivati atha kho 
Jivako Komürebhaoco Kåkam dåsam otad svoca: handa 
bhane Kaka Amalakam са kháda påniyam ca pivasst ”ti. [97 |j 
atha kho Kako dåso ayam kho vejjo àmalakam ca khádati 
påniyam oa piveti, na arahati kifici påpakam hotan ti 
upaddhdmalakam ca khádi påniyam ca apåyi. tama tam 
upaddhåmalskam khádayitam tatth' eva nicchåresi. atha 
kho K&ko dåso Jivakam Komårabhaccam etad avoca: atthi 
me Acariya jivitan ti. må bhane Kaka bhåyi, {таш o' eva 
&rogo bhavissasi, råjå ca сардо, so гаја ghåtåpeyyåsi mam, 
tenåham па пітва шій Bhaddavatikem hatthinikam Kàkassa 
niyyådetvå yena Råjagaham tena pakkåmi, anupubbena yena 
R&jagaham yena raja Magadho Вепіуо BimbisAro ten’ upa- 
eamkami, upasamkamitvå rañño Mågadbassa Seniyassa Bim- 
bisårasan etam attham årocesi. sutthu bhane Jivaka akási yam 
pi na nivatto, oando so raja ghåtåpeyyåsi tan ti. ||28i| atha 
kho råjå Pajjoto årogo samáno Jivakassa Komirabhsocasn 
santike dåtam påhesi, Agacchatu Jivako varam dassAmi- 
ti. alam ayyo adhikáram me devo saratü 't tena kho 
pana samayena гаййо Pejjotassa Siveyyakam dussayugam 
uppennam hoti bahunnam dussánam bahunnam dussayugánam 
behunnam dusssyugasatdnam bahuonam duseayugasahassá- 
nam bahunnam dussayugasatasahassánam aggam ca settham 
ca mokkham ca uttamam ca pavaram ca.  atha kho råjå 
Pajjoto tam Siveyyakam dusssyugam Jivakasss KomAra- 
bhaccassa påhesi. atha kho Jivakassa Komårabhaconssa etad 
&hosi: idam kho me Biveyyekam dusssyugam гаййА Pajjotena 
pabitam behunnam dussinam . . . pavaram са, ns, yimam 
айдо Косі paocárahati aññatra tena bhagavaté arahstå sammå- 
sambuddhena rafifié và Magadhens Seniyena Bimbisårenå "ti. 
1291 

tena kho рапа samsyens bhagavato kayo dosåbhisanno 
hoti. atha kho bhagavà åyssmantam Ånendam ámantesi: 


VIII. 1. 80-83.) MAHÅVAGGA. 279 


dosåbhisanno kho Ananda tathAgatassa kåyo, iochati tatbågato 
virecanam pátun ti, atha kho åyasmå Anando yena Jivako 
Komårabhaceo ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvà Jivakam 
Komárabhsocam etad avoca: dosåbhissnno kho åvuso Jivaka 
tathågatassa kAyo, icchati tathågato virecanam påtun ti. 
tena hi*bhante Ånande bhagavato kåyam katipAham sine- 
heth& ‘ti. atha kho åyasmå Anando bhagavato kåyam 
katipåbam sinebetvå yena Jivako Komárabhaoco ten’ upa- 
samkami, upesamkamitvà Jivakam Komårabhsocam etad 
evoca : siniddho kho ávuso Jivaka tathAgatassa kåyo, yassa 
dåni kAlam mafifiasiti. 13011 atha kho Jivakassa Komára- 
bhaccassa etad ahosi: na kho me tam patirüpam yo "ham 
bhagavato olárikem virecanam dadeyyan ti, tipi uppala- 
hattbåni nånåbhessjjehi peribhåvetvå yena bhagavà ten’ 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvå ekam uppalahattham bhagavato 
upanåmesi imam bhante bhagavå pathamam uppalahettham 
upasiighatu, idam bhagavantam dasakkhettum vireoessatiti. 
dutiyam pi uppalahattham bhagavato upanåmesi imam bhante 
bhagsvå dutiyam uppalahsttham upesingbatu, idum bhaga- 
vantam dasakkhattum virecemsatiti. tatiyam pi uppelaha- 
ttham bhegavato upanåmesi imam bhante bhagavå tatiyam 
uppalahattbam upasiighstu, idam bhegavantam dasakkha- 
ttum vireoessatiti, evam bhagavato samatimsåya virecanam 
bhevissatiti. atha kho Jivako Komárabhacoo bhagavato eama- 
timsåya virecanam datvå bhagavantam abhivådetvå padakkhi- 
pam katvå pakkåmi. |31] atha kho Jivakessa Komára- 
bhaocasss babi dvárskotthaká nikkhantassa etad ahosi: mayå 
kho bhagavato samatimsáya virecanam dinnam. dosåbhisanno 
tatbågatassa kåyo, na bhagavantam samatimsakkhattum vire- 
cessati, ekünatimsakkhattum bhagavantam virecessati, api 
ca bhagavà viritto nahüyissati, nahátam bhagavantam sakim 
virecemati, evam bhagavato samatimsáye virecanam bhavissa- 
titi. atha kho bhagavå Jivakassa Komárabhaccassa cetasá 
cetoparivitakkam аййАуа &yasmantam Anandam åmentesi: 
idhánande Jivakassa Komirabhaccassa bahi dvårakottbakå 
nikkhentasss etad abosi: mayá kho bhagavato . . . bhavissa- 
titi. tena b’ Ánanda uphodakam patiyadetba "ti. evam 
bhante ‘ti kho áyasmá Ånando bhagavato patisunitvå unho- 


280 MAHÅVAGGA. (VILL. 1. 32-35. 


dakam patiyådesi. [32] atha kho Jivako KomArabhacco 
yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvà bhagavan- 
tam abbivådetvå ekamantam nisidi, ekamantam nisinno kho 
Jivako Komårabhacco bhagavantam etad avoca: viritto 
bhante bhagavé 'ti. viritto ’mhi JivakA 'ti idha mayham 
bhante bahi dvårakotthakå nikkhantassa etad ahosi: mayá 
kho bhagavato . . . bhavissatiti. nahüyatu bhante bhagavå, 
nahåyatu sugato 'ti. atha kho bhagava unhodakam nabáyi, 
nahátam bhagavantam sakim virecesi, evam bbagavato sama» 
timsÁye virecanam ahosi atha kho Jivako Komarabbacoo 
bhagavantam etad avoca: yåva bhante bbagavato kayo 
pakatatto hoti, alam yfsapindepåtenå 'ti. atha kho bhaga- 
vato kåyo ne cirass' eva pekatatto ahosi. || 33 jj 

atha kho Jivako Komårabhaoco tam Siveyyakam dussayu- 
gam ådåya yena bhagavå ten’ upasapkami, upesamkamitvå 
bhegavantam abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi ekamantam 
nisinno kho Jtvako Kom&rabhacco bhagavantam etad svoca : 
ekåbam bhante bhagavantam varam yåcåmiti. atikkantavar& 
kho Jivaka tathågatå 'ti. yam са bbante kappati yam са 
anavajjan ti. vadehi Jivak& 'ti. bhagavå bhante pamsuki- 
liko bhikkhueamgho ca. idam me bhante Siveyyakam 
dussayugam rafifié Pajjotena pahitam bahunnam dussånam 
bahunnam dusssyugåuam bahunnam dussayugasatinam ba- 
hunnam dussayugasahassinam bahunnem dussayugasatasa- 
hassånam aggam ca settham ca mokkbam ca uttamam ca 
pavaram ca. patigarfbåtu me bhante bhagavå Siveyyakam 
dussayugam bhikkhusamghassa ca gahapaticivaram anujå- 
nat "Ы. patiggahesi bhagavå Siveyyakam dusssyugam. 
atha kho bhegavå Jivakam Komürsbhacoun dhammiyå 
kathüya sandassesi samådapesi samuttejesi sampehamsesi. 
atha kho Jivako Komårabhacco bhegavstå dhammiyå ka- 
thåya sandasaito samAdapito samuttejitosampahamsito uttbåyå- 
sanå bhagavantam abhivådetvå padakkhinam katvå pakkåmi. 
1941 atha kho bhagavå etasmim nidáne dhammikatham 
katvå bhikkhü &mantesi: anujånåmi bhikkhave gahapati- 
oivarem. уо icchati pamsuküliko hotu, yo icchati gahapati- 
civaram sddiyatu. itaritarena р’ ham bhikkhave santutthim 
vennemiti, assosum kho Råjagahe шапивай bhagavatå 


ҮШ. 1. 35-8. 2.] MAHAVAGGA. 281 


kira bhikkhünam gabapsticivaram anufifiøten ti, te ca 
manusså hatthá ahesum udaggá, idåni kho mayam dánáni 
damåme puññáni karissáma yato bhagsvatå bhikkhünam 
gahapeticivaram anuñüñtan ti, ekAhen’ eva Rajagahe bahüni 
efvarasshassåni uppajjimsu. assosum kho jünapadá manusså 
bhagavaté kira bhikkhünam gabapstictvaram anufiflåtan ti, 
te са manusså hatthå ahesum udaggå, idáni kho mayam 
дёоёрі dassima puññáni karissåma yato bhagavatà bhikkhü- 
nam gahapaticivaram anuññátan ti, janspade pi ek&hen" eva 
bahüni civarasahasåni uppejjimse. ||35(| tena kho pana 
samayena samghassa påvåro uppanno hoti bhagavato etam 
attham Árocesum. snujånåmi bhikkhave påvåran ti. ko- 
seyyapåvåro uppanno hoti. snujånåmi bhikkhave kosey ya- 
påvåren ti. kojavam uppannam hoti, anujånåmi bhikkhave 
kojavan ti. 11361111 
pathamekabh&paváram nitthitam. 


tena kho pana samayena Küsikar&jà Jivakasss Ko- 
mårsbhaccassa addhakásikam kambalam páhesi upaddha- 
kásinam khamaménam. atha kho Jivako Komarabhacco tam 
eddhakAsikam kambalam ådåya yena bhagavà ten’ upasam- 
kemi, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abbivådetvå ekamantam 
nisidi. ekamantam nisinno kho Jivako Komürabhaoco bha- 
gavantam etad avoca: ayam mo bhante addhakåsiko kambalo 
KAsiraññá pahito upeddhakásinam khamamåno.  patigaghátu 
me bbante bhagavå kambalam yam mama авла digharattam 
hitåya sukbáy& 'ti. patiggahesi bhagavé kambalam. atha 
kho bhagavå Jivakam Komárabhaocam dhammiyå kathåya 
sandassesi — la — padakkhinam ketvå pakkåmi. atha kho 
bhagsvà etasmim mnidåne dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü 
åmantesi : anujánámi bhikkhave kambalan ti. |1121 


tena kho pana samayena samghassa uccávacáni civaråni 
uppajjanti. atha kho bhikkhünam etad ahosi: kim nu kho 
bhagavatå civaram anufifidtam kim ananuññâtan ti. bhaga- 
vato etam attham årocesum.  ennján&ámi bhikkhave cha 
civsrüni khomam kappasikam koseyyam kambalam гапат 
bhañgan ti. ||l| tena kho pana samayena to bhikkht gaha- 


299 MAHÅVAGGA. (VILL. з. 3-4 4. 


paticfvaram sAdiyanti, te kukkuocáyantà pamsuktlsm па 
øådiyanti ekam yeva bhagavatå civaram anufifiåtam na dve 
‘ti, bhagavato etam attham drocesum. anujånAmi bhikkha- 
ve gahapatictvaram sådiyantena pamsukülam pi sáditum, tad- 
ubhayena р’ ábam bhikkhave santutthim vanpemiti, |2181 


tena kho pana samayena sambahulå bhikkhü Kosalesu 
janapedesu addhinamaggapatipanné honti. eksoce bhikkhü 
susånam okkamimsu pamsukilAys, ekacce bhikkhü någa- 
mesum. ye te bhikkhü susånam okkamimsu pamsuküláya 
te pamsukûlâni labhimsu, ye te bhikkhü någamesum te evam 
Ahamsu: amhåkam pi dvuso bhågam detbå "ti. te evam 
Áhamsu: па mayam åvuso tumhükam bhágam dassima, kissa 
tumhe någamitthå 'ti. bhagavato etam attham Arocesum. anu- 
jånåmi bhikkhave nágamentánam n&ák&má bhagam 4Мап ti. 
1110 tena kho pana samayena sambahulå bhikkhü Kosalesu 
janapedesu addbånemeggapetipannå honti, ekacce bhikkhüà 
susánam okkamimsu pamsukfilåye, eksoce bhikkht &ga- 
mesum. ye te bhikkhü susånsm okkemimsu pamsukålåye 
te pamanküláni labhimsu, ye te bhikkhü ågamesum te evam 
Ahamsu: amhåkam pi &vuso bhågam dethå "ti. te evam 
Áhamsu: па mayam Avuso tumbåkam bbågam dassáma, kissa 
tumhe na okkemitthá 'ti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. 
enujánámi bhikkhave ågamentånam akámA bhågam dåtan 
ti 121 tena kho pana samayena sambahulå bhikkhü Kosa- 
lesu janapadesu addhånamaggapetipannå hopti.  ekaoce 
bhikkhü pathamam susånam okkamimsu pamsukålåye, ekacoo 
bhikkhà pacchå okkamimeu. уе te bhikkhü pathamam 
susünam okksmimsu pamsuk(laye te pamsukülàni labhimsu, 
уе te bhikkhü paochå okkamimsu te na labhimsu, te evam 
Вһатви : amhükem pi åvuso bhágam dethå ‘ti. te evam 
dhamsu: na mayam åvuso tumbåkam bbågam damåma, kima 
tumhe pacohá okkamittbå 'ti. bhagavato etam attham 
årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave peccbå okkantAnam nê- 
kama bhågam dåtun ti. |3] tena kho pana samayena samba- 
hulá bhikkhü Kosslesu janapadesu addbånamaggapati- 
pannå honti. te sadisá eusànam okkamimsu pamsukülAys, 
ekacoe bhikkhü pamsukülàni labhimsu, ekacoe bhikkhü na 


VIII. 4. 4-8. 1] MAHÅVAGGA. 283 


labbimsu. ye te bbikkbO na labbimsu te evam &harpeu: 
amhåkam рі åvuso bbågam dethå 'ti. te evam Ahamsu: na 
mayam åvuso tumhákam bhágam dassåms, kiwa tumhe na 
labhitthá ’ti, bhagavato etam attham &roceseum.  annjánámi 
bhikkhave sadisinam okkantånam akåmå bhågam dåtun ti. 
H4| tena kho pane samayens sambebulå bhikkhü Kosalesu 
jenapedesu addhånamaggapatipannå honti. te katikam katvå 
susånam okkamimsu pamsukül&ye, ekacce bhikkhü pamsukü- 
låni labhimsu, ekacce bhikkhü na Isbhimeu. ye te bhikkhå 
па labhimsu te evam áhamsu: amhákam pi &vuso bbågam 
dethå 't te evam áhemsu: ра maysm åvuso tumhåkam 
bhágam dassima, kiasa tumhe na labhitthá 'ti. bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. anujánámi bhikkhave katikam katvå 
okkentánam akåmå bhágam dátun ti. ||5/|4| 


tena kho pana samayena manns oivaram ádáya 
åråmam  ágacchanti, te patiggdhakam alabhaméné peti- 
haranti, civaram perittam uppejjati. bhagavato etam 
attham árooeeum. anujånåmi bhikkhave paficah’ añgehi 
samannágatam bhikkhum civarapatiggåhakem samma- 
-mnitum : yo па ohandågatim gecoheyye, na dosågatim 
gaocheyye, па mohdgatim  gaccheyya, na bhayågatim 
gacoheyys, gahitågahitam ca jåneyya. ||1|| evam ca pana 
bhikkhave sammannitabbo : pathamam bhikkhu y&citabbo, 
yücitvà vyattena bhikkhun& petibalene samgho sApetabbo : 
supåtu me bhante samgho. yadi samghassa pattakallam 
samgho itthannámam bhikkhum civarspatiggåhakam samma- 
nneyy&. eså ñatti. supàtu me bbante samgho. samgho 
itthannámam bhikkbum civarapatiggåbakam sammannati. 
yassåyasmato khamati itthanndmassa bhikkhuno clvara- 
patiggabakassa sammuti, so tuph’ assa, yassa na kkbamati 
so bhåseyye. sammato samghens itthsnnåmo bhikkhu сі- 
varapetiggåbako. khamati samghases, tasmå tuphi, evap 
etam dhårsyåmiti. 21151 


tens kho pana samayens civarapstiggåhakå bhikkhé civa- 
ram patiggahetva tatth' eva ujjbitvå pakkamanti, civaram 
nasseti. bbagavato etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi 


284 MAHÅVAGGA. [VIII.6.1-0.1, 


bhikkhave paficah’ angebi samannágatam bhikkhum civa- 
renidáhakam sammannitum: yo na obandågatim gaccheyya 
+++ na bbsyágatim gaocheyya nihitánihitam ca jåneyya. |11 
evam ca pena bhikkhave ssmmannitabbo: pathamam bhikkhu 
yåcitabbo, yácitvà vyattena bhikkhun’ patibalena samgho 
fiåpetabbo : suņåtu me bhante samgho. yadi samghesss 
pattakallam samgho itthannåmam bhikkhum civaranida- 
hakam sammanneyya. eså ñatti. sunåta me bhante samgho. 
samgho itthannåmam bbikkhum ctvaranidahakam samus- 
прв. yasshyasmato khamati itthanndmassa bhikkhuno 
oiveranidáhakassa sammuti so tunh’ assa, yassa na kkhamati 
so bhåseyys.  s&mmato samghena itthannåmo bhikkhu 
eivaranidáhako. khamati samghassa, tasmA tuphi, evam 
etam dhárey&miti. 1216) 


tena kho pana samayens civaranidAhekå bhikkhü mandape 
pi rukkhamfile pi nimbakose pi civaram nidahanti, undurebi 
pi upacikáhi pi khejjanti. bhagavato etam attham árocesum. 
anujénémi bhikkhsve bbandågåram sammannitum yam 
samgho &kankhati vihåram vå addhayogam vA påsådam và 
hammiyam và guhem vá. 1111 evam ca pana bhikkhave 
sammannitsbbo: vyattena bhikkhun& petibalena samgbo 
füpetabbo: sundtu me bhante samgho. yadi samghasm 
pattakallam eamgho itthannámam vihåram bhandågårem 
sammanneyya. ева ñatti. sunåtu me bhante samgho. samgho 
itthennámam viháram bhandágárem sammannati. yassåyas- 
mato kbemati itthannåmasss vihårassa bhandågårasse sammuti 
eo tuph' asas, yassa na kkhamati so bháseyya. sammato 
samghena ittbannåmo vibåro bhandágáram. khameti eam- 
ghassa, tasmå tuph!, evam etam dhArayAmiti. |27 


tens kho pana samayens samghassa bbandågåre civarap 
aguttam bot. bhagavato etam attham árocesum. апп 
nåmi bhikkhave paflcah' angehi samanuågstam bhikkhum 
bhanpdågårikem sammannitum: yo na chandågatim ga- 
coheyya . . . na bhayügstim gaccheyya guttåguttam cs 
јёпеуув. evam са pana bhikkhave sammannitabbo — la — 
sammato samghena itthannåmo  bhikkhu bhandAgáriko. 


ҮШ. ©. 1-10. 1.] MABAVAGGA. 285 


khamati samghessa, tasmá tunhi, evam etam dhåreyåmiti. 
lq tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiy& bhikkhQ 
bbandågårikam vuttbåpenti. bhagavato etam attham åro- 
cesum. na bhikkhave bbandågåriko vutthápetabbo. уо 
vuttbåpeyya, åpatti dukkatasså "ti. 12 1811 


tena kho pana ватеуепа samghasea bhendágüre civaram 
ussannem hoti. bhagavato etam attham Årocesum. anujå- 
nami bhikkhave esmmukhibhftena samghena bhåjetun ti. 
tena kho pana samayena sabbo eamglo civaram bhåjento 
kolåhalam akåsi. bhagavato etam attham drocesom. anujå- 
nami bhikkhave ‘peficah’ angehi samannågatam bhikkhum 
civarabhüjakam sammannitum yo na chanddgatim ga- 
echeyya . . . na bhayågatim gaccheyya bbåjitåbhåjitam ca 
jåneyya. evam ca pana bhikkhave sammannitabbo — la — 
sammato samghena itthanndmo bhikkhu civarabhåjako. 
khamati samghassa, tasmå tunhi, evam etam dbårsyåmiti. 
111 athe kho cfvarsbhåjakånam bhikkhünam etad ahoei: 
katham nu kho civaram bhåjetabben ti. bhagavato etam 
вет &rocesum. anujindmi bhikkhave pathamam uccinitv& 
tulayitvà vanpåvanpam katvå bhikkhà ganetvé veggam 
bandbitvå civarapstivisam thapetun ti. athe kho civera- 
bh&jakánam bhikkhünam etad ahosi: katbam nu kho såma- 
nerånam  cívarapetiviso dåtabbo "ti. bhegavato etam 
вета årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave såmanerånam upa- 
ddhapativisam dáton ti. ||2|| tena kho pana .samayena 
аййаќаго bbikkhu sakens bh&gens uttaritukámo hoti, bha- 
gavato etam ват årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave utta- 
rantassa sakam bhågam dåtun ti. tena kho pana samayena 
aññataro bhikkhu atirekabhagena uttaritukåmo hoti. bhaga- 
vato etam attham Arocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave anukkhepe 
dinne atireksbbågam dåtun ti. |3|| atha kho civarabhåja- 
kånam bhikkhfinam etad shosi: katham nu kho civarapati- 
viso dåtabbo ågatapetipåtiyå nu kho udåha yathåvuddhan 
ti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave 
vikalake tosetvå kusapåtam kåtun ti. 14191 


tena kho pana samayens bhikkhü chakanena pi pandu- 


286 MAHÅVAGGA. ГЕШ. 10. 1-11. 2. 


mattikáya pi civaram rajenti, civaram dubbannam hoti. 
bhagavato etam attham årocesum. envjånåmi bhikkhave cha 
rajanáni mülarsjanam khandherajanam tacarajanam patta- 
rajanam puppharsjenam phalerajanan ti. |1} tena kho pans 
samayena bhikkhü sítunnakáya civaram rajanti, civeram 
duggandham hoti. bhagaveto etam attham årocesum. 
anujånåmi bhikkhave rajanam pacitum oullarsjanakumbhin 
ti. rejanam uttariyati. anujånåmi bhikkhave uttarájumpam 
bandhitun ti. tens kho рапа samayena bhikkhü na jånanti 
rajanam pakkam vá apakkam vå. bhagavato etam attham 
Årocesum. annjånåmi bhikkbave udake vå nakhapitthikåye 
vå thevakam dåtun ti.||2| tena kho pana samayena bhi- 
kkhå rajanam oropentå kumbhim åvajjanti, kumbh! bhijjati. 
bhagavato etam sttham årocesum. anujdnimi bhikkhave 
rajeneujufikam danpdekstbåliken ti. tena kho pena sama- 
yena bhikkhünam rajanabhajanam na samvijjati. bhagevato 
etam attham ürooesum.  anujín&mi bhikkhave rajanako- 
lambam rajenaghatan ti. tena kho pana samayena bhikkhüà 
påtiyåpi patte pi civaram ssmmeddanti, civaram paribhijjati. 
bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. anujinimi bbikkheve 
rajanadonikan ti. || 31/10 || 


tena kho pans samayena bhikkh( chamåya ofvaram pattha- 
ranti, civaram pamsukitam hoti. bhagavato etam attham 
Arocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave tinasanthårakan ti  tipa- 
santhárako upacikåbi khajjati. bhagavato etam attham 
årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave civaravamsam cívararajjun 
ti. majjhena laggenti, rajanam ubható galati. bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. apujånåmi bhikkhave kanne bandhi- 
tun ti. kenno jirati. bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. 
anujánámi bhikkhave kannasuttakan ti. rajanam ekato 
galati. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave samparivattakam - samparivattakam rejetum na 
oa acohinne theve pakkamitun ti. ||l|| tena kbo pana sama- 
yena civaram petthinnam hoti. bhagavato etam attham 
Årocesum. anvjånåmi bhikkhave udake osåretun ti. tens 
kho pana samayens civaram pharusam hoti bhagavato 
etam attham árocesum. anuján&mi bhikkhave påpinå &ko- 


VIII. 11. 2-13. 1.) MAHÁVAGGA. 287 


tetun ti. tena kho pana samsyens bbikkhfi acchinnakani 
dhárenti dantakåsåvåni. manusså ujjbåyanti khiyanti vip&- 
centi: seyysthápi n&ma gih? kåmabhogino "ti. bhagavato 
etam ааш årocesum. ns bhikkhave acchinpakáni ctvaráni 
dhåretabbåni. yo dháreyya, ápatti dukkatassA ”ti. [|2111 


athe kho bhagavå Råjagahe yathåbhirantam viharitvå 
yena Dakkhinågiri tena cárikam pakkámi. addasa kho 
bhagsvå Magadhakhettam accibandham pálibandham 
mariyüdabandham singh&takebandham, disvåne åyasmantam 
Ánandam åmantesi: passasi по tvam Ananda Magadha- 
khettam aecibendham . . . singh&takabandhan ti. evam 
bhante.  ussahasi tvam Ananda bhikkhünam  evarüpáni 
oivarini samvidahitan ti. ussah&mi bbegavå 'ti. atha kho 
bhagavå Dakkhinågirismim yathübhirantam viharitvå punad 
eva Rájagsham paccågacchi. atha kho ñyasmá Anando 
sambahulånam bbikkhQnam civeråni samvidabitva yena 
bhagavé ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvà bhagavantam 
otad avoca: passatu me bhante bbagavå civaråni samvida- 
hitåniti. [LI] atha kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne dhammi- 
katham katvå bhikkh( Amantesi: pandito bhikkhave Anando, 
теһёрайдо bhikkhave Ånaudo, yatra hi nåma mayñ ssmkhi- 
опа bhásitassa vitthdrena attham Ajanissati, kusim pi 
náma karissati addhakusim pi пёта karissati mapdalam pi 
n. k. eddhamandalam pi n. k. vivattam pi n. k. anuvi- 
vattam pi n. k. giveyyakam pi n. k. jangheyyakam pi n. k. 
báhantem рі n. k. chinnskam са bhaviseati sattalükham 
samanasåruppam paocatthikånam ca anabhijjhitam. anujá- 
pAmi bhikkhave chinnakam samgbåtim chinnakam uttará- 
sangam chinnakam antaravásakan ti. 12111811 


etha kho bhagsvå Råjagahe yathébhirantam vibaritvé 
yena Vesålt tena cárikam pakkåmi. addasa kho bhagavå 
antarå са Råjagaham antsrå ca Vesålim addhánamaggapati- 
panno sambehule bhikkhû civarehi ubbhanpdite slee pi 
civarsbhisim karitvà khandhe pi civarabhisim karitvå ka- 
tiyåpi civarabhisim karitvå ågscchante, disvåns bhagavato 
etad ahosi : atilahum kho ime moghapuriså civare båhullåya 


288 MAHÅVAGGA. ГУШ. 13. 1-6. 


Avattà, yam nün&ham bhikkhOnem civare simam bandhe- 
yyem meriyádam thapeyyan ti. ||l|| atha kho bhagavå 
anupubbena cårikam caramáno yena Vesáli tad avasarL tatra 
sudam bhagavå Vesáliyam viherati Gotamake cetiye. 
tena kho pana samayena bhagavå sitåsu hemantikåsu 
rattisu anterattheküsu  himap&tasamaye rattim ajjhokAse 
ekactvaro nisidi, na bhagavantam sitam ahosi. nikkhante 
pathame yAme sitam bhagavantam ahosi. dutiyam bhagavå 
civaream pårupi, na bhagavantam sitam ahosi. nikkhante 
majjhime yåme sitam bhagavantam ahosi. tatiyam bhagava 
ofvaram pårupi, na bhegavantam sitam ahosi. nikkhante 
pacchime yAme uddhate arune nandimukbiyå rattiyA ettam 
bhagavantam ahosi. catuttham bhagavå civaram pårupi, ne 
bhagavantam sitam ahosi. [2| atha kho bbagavato etad 
shosi : ye pi kho te kulsputtå imasmim dhammavinaye 
ettáluk& eitabhtruk& te pi sakkonti ticivarena yåpetum. yam 
nånåham bhikkhünam civare eimam bandheyyam mariy&dam 
thapeyyam ticivarem anujáneyyan ti. atha kho bhagavå 
etasmim pidåne dhemmikstham katvå bhikkhü ümantesi : 
(181 idh&áham bhikkhave antarå ca Ráàjagaham antarå ca 
Vesålim addhánamaggapatipanno addasam sambahule bhi- 
kkhü civerehi ubbhandite візе pi civarabhisim karitvå 
khandhe pi civarabhisim karitvå katiyüpi civarabhisim 
karitvå Agacchante, disvana me etad ahosi: atilaham kho 
ime moghepuriså civare bahollåya Avsttå, yam nün&ham 
bhikkhünam civare simam bandheyyam mariy&dam the- 
peyyen ti. [|4] idbåbam bhikkhave візи hemantikåsu 
rattieu antaratthekåen himapåtasamaye габіт ejjhokåse 
ekacivaro nistdim, na mam sitam sbosi. nikkbante pethame 
уйше sitam mam вһові. dutiyáham civaram pårupim na 
mam sitam ahosi. nikkhante majjhime y&me sitam mam 
&hosi tatiyåham civaram párupim, па mam sitam ahosi. 
nikkhsnte pacchime yåme uddhate arupe nandimukhiyå 
rattiyå sitam mam ehosi. catuttbåham civaram párupim, na 
mam sitam ahosi. tassa mayham bhikkhave etad ahosi: ye pi 
kho te kulaputtå imasmim dhammavinaye sit&luk& sitabht- 
rukà te pi sakkonti tiolvarena y&petum. yam nünü&ham 
bhikkhünam cívare etmam bandheyyam mariy&dam thape- 


VIII. 13. 3-14 1.) MAHÅVAGGA. 289 


yyam ticlvaram anujåneyyan ti. anujånåmi bhikkhave 
ticivaram digunam samghátim ekacciyam uttarásangam 
ekacoiyam antaravásakan ti. |||] tena kho pana samayena 
ohabbaggiyå bhikkhü bhagavata ticiveram anuñiñátan ti 
aññen' eva ticivarena gámam pavisanti, аййепа ticivarena 
åråme acchanti, afifiena ticivarene nahánam otaranti. ye te 
bbikkhå appiochá te ujjhéyanti khtyanti vipåcenti: katham 
hi nåma chabbaggiyå bhikkhü atirekacivarem dháressantiti. 
atha kho te bhikkhü bbagavato etam attham årocesum. 
atha kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne dhammikatham ketvå 
bhikkhü &mentesi: na bhikkhave atirekacivaram dháre- 
tabbam. yo dháreyya, yath&dhammo káretabbo 'ti. 116] 
tena kho pana samayena åyasmato А nandasea atirekactva- 
ram uppannam hoti &yasmá ca Anando tam olvaram 
Ayasmato Süriputtassa dåtukåmo hoti &yasmá ca Såri- 
putto Sakete viharati. atha kho åyasmato Anandassa etad 
&hosi: bhagavatå pafiüattam na etirekactveram dhåretabben 
ti, idam ca me atirekacivaram uppennam aham ca imam 
civaram åyasmato Såriputtassa dåtukåmo Ayasmå ca Såriputto 
Sakete viharati. katham nu kho maya patipajjitabban ti. 
atha kho åysamå Anando bhagaveto etam attham årocesi: 
kivaciram panAnanda Såriputto Agacchissatiti. navamam 
vå bhagavå divasam деватат vá ”ti. atha kho bhagavé 
etasmim nidåne dhammikatham katv4 bhikkhü &mentesi: 
anojáu&mi bhikkhave des&haparamam stirekacivaram dhê- 
гейш ti. ||7| tena kho pans samayena bhikkhünam 
atirekacivaram uppajjati. atha kho bhikkhünam etad ahosi: 
katham nu kho atirekacivare patipejjitabban ti. bhagavato 
etam attham årocesum. anujánámi bhikkhave atirekaciva- 
ram vikeppetan ti. |8118 


atha kho bhagavé Vesåliyam yathåbhirantam vibaritvå 
yena Bårånasi tena cårikam pskkámi. anupubbena cåri- 
kam сагашёпо yena Bårånast tad avesari. tatra sudem 
bbagavå Bårånasiyam viharati Isipatane migadåye. 
tena kho pana samayens аййаѓагазва bhikkhuno antaravåsako 
chiddo hoti. athe kho tassa bhikkhuno etad ahosi: bhaga- 
vaté ticivaram anufifidtam digunå samghéti ekacciyo uttará- 


YOL. ш. 19 


990 MAHAVAGGA. [YIIL 14 1-18. 2. 


sango ekacciyo antaravåsako, ayam са me antaravåsako 
chiddo. yam nün&ham eggajlam acchupeyyam samantato 
dupattam bbavisseti majjhe ekacciyan ti. 111 atha kho so 
bhikkhu aggalam acchupesi. addasa kho bhagavå вепйзапа- 
cérikam &hindanto tam bhikkhum aggalam acchupentam, 
disvåna yena so bhikkhu ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå 
tam bbikkhum etad avoca: kim tvam bhikkhu karositi. 
aggalam bhagavå acchupemiti. sådhu sådhu bhikkhu, s&dhu 
kho tvam bbikkhu aggajam acchupesiti. atha kho bhagavå 
etasmim nidåne dhammikatham katvå bhikkhü Amantesi : 
anujânâmi bhikkhave ahatånam dussårem abhatakappánam 
digunam samgbåtim ekacciyam uttaråsafigam ekacciyam 
antaravåsakam, utuddhatånam dussånam catugunam samghå- 
tim digunam uttar&aangam digunam antaravåsakam. pamsu- 
küle yåvadattham pápanike ussåho karaniyo. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave aggalam tunnam отв кет kandusakam da]hi- 
kamman ti. 1211411 


atha kho bbagavå Bårånasiyem yatbübhirantem viha- 
ritvå yena Sévatthi tena cårikam pakkámi anupubbena 
cårikam caramáno yena Såvattbi tad avasari. tatra sudam 
bhagavå Savatthiyam viharati Jetavane Anåthapindi- 
kassa frame. atha kho Visåkhå Migåramåtå yena 
bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvà bhagavantem 
abbivådetvå ekamentam nisidi. ekemantam nisinnam kho 
Visikbam Migåramétaram bhegavå dhammiyé kathaya 
sandassesi . . . sampahamsesi. atha kho Visåkhå Migåra- 
måtå bhagavatå dbemmiyå kathüya sandassitå . . . sampa- 
hameitå bhagavantam etad avoca: adhivüsetu me bhante 
bhagavå svétandya bhattam saddhim bhikkhusamghenå 
‘ti. adhivüsesi bhagavå tunhibhdvena, atha kho Visåkhå 
Migåramåtå bhagaveto adbivåsenam viditvå utthåyåsank 
bhagavantam abhivådetvå padakkhinam katvå pakkAmi. 111 
tena kho pana samayena tasså rattiyá accayena cåtuddipiko 
mahåmegho pavassi. atha kho bhagavå bhikkhà ámantesi ; 
yathá bhikkhave Jetavane vasssti evam catüsu dipesu vassati, 
ovassåpetha bhikkhave kåyam, ayam pacchimake cátuddipiko 
mahåmegho "ti. evam bhante 'ti kho te bhikkhü bhagavato 


ҮП. 18. 2-6.) MAHAVAGGA. 291 


petisupitvà nikkhittacivarà kåyam ovassåpenti. ||2|| atha 
kho Visåkhå Migåramåtå panitam khádaniyam bhojaniyam 
patiyådåpetvå dåsim Anapesi: gaccha је åråmam gantvå 
kålam årocehi k&lo bhante nitthitam bbattan ti. evam ayye 
‘ti kho så dåst Visåkhåya Migåramåtuyå patisunitvå åråmam 
gantvå addesa bhikkhü nikkhittecivare kåyem ovassåpente, 
disvåna n’ atthi åråme bhikkhd, Ajtvaka kåyam ovassåpentiti 
yena Visåkhö MigåramåtA ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå 
Visåkham Migåremåtaram etad avoca: n’ atth’ ayye drime 
bhikkhü, Ajivaké kåyam ovassåpentiti. atha kho Visåkbåya 
Migüramátuys& panditåya viyattåys medhåviniyå etad аћові : 
nissamsayam kho ayy& nikkbittacivarå kayam ovassåpentiti, 
såyam bålå meflüitthe n’ atthi åråme bbikkh4, djivaké kåyam 
ovassåpentiti, dåsim ånåpesi : gaccha je &rámam gantvå 
kålam &rocehi kålo bhante pittbitam bbattan ti. 1311 atha 
kho te bhikkhü gattáni sttikeritvå kallakáy& civaráni ga- 
hetvå yathåvihåram pavisimsu. atha kho så dàsi &rámam 
gantvå bhikkhü apassanti n’ etthi ár&me bhikkhü, suñño 
åråmo 'ti yena Visåkhå Migåramåtå ten’ upasamkami, upa- 
samkamitvå Vieåkham Migåremåtaram etad avoca: n' atth' 
ayye åråme bhikkhü, suñño åråmo ‘ti. atha kho Visåkhåya 
Migåramåtuyå panditáya viyattåya medháviniy& etad ahosi: 
nissameayam kho ayyå gattáni sitikeritvà kallakdya civarüni 
gehetvà yatbåvihåram pevittbå, såyam bala maññittha n’ 
atthi åråme bhikkbå, suüfio åråmo "ti dásim Anapesi: gaccha 
je åråmam gantvå kålem årocehi kálo bhante nitthitam 
bhattan ti. 14| atha kho bbagavå bhikkbü &mantesi: 
sannahatha bhikkhave pattacivarem, kálo bhattasså "ti. 
evam bhante ti kho te bhikkhü bhagavato paccassosum. 
atha kho bbagavå pubbanhasemeyam nivåsetvå pattactvaram 
Adaya seyyatbåpi nama balavå puriso sammiiijitam vå bå- 
ham pasåreyya pasáritam vå båham sammiíljeyya evam eva 
Jetavane antarehito Visåkhåya Migåramåtuyå kotthake på- 
turahosi. nisidi bbagavå pafifiatte &sane saddhim bhikkhu- 
samghena. |1511 atha kho Visàkhá Migáramátá acchariyam 
vata bho abbhutam vata bho tathügatasss mahiddhikatà 
mahánubhávatà, yatra hi nama jannukamettesu pi oghesu 
pavattamünesu katimattesu pi oghesu pavattamånesu na hi 


992 MAHAVAGGA. (VIII. 18. 6-9. 


nama ekabhikkhussa pi pada vå civaråni vå alláni bhavissan- 
titi hatthå udaggå buddhapamukham bhikkbusamgham pant- 
tena khådaniyena bhojaniyena sabatthå eantappetvá sampa- 
våretvå bhagavantam bhuttávim onftapattapånim ekamantam 
nisidi ekamantam nisinná kho Visåkhå Migåramåtå bha- 
gavantam etad avoca : attbåham bhante bhagavantam veråni 
yåcåmiti. atikkantavarà kho Visåkhe tathågatå 'ti. yåni ca 
bhante kappiyåni yåni ca snevajjåniti. vadebi Visåkhe "ti. 
161 icch4m’ aham bhante samghasss yüvajivam vasaika- 
såtikam dåtum, Agantukabhattam datum, gamikabhattam 
datum, gilanabhattam datum, gilánupatthákabbattam dåtum, 
gilanabhesajjam datum, dhuvayågum datum, bhikkhuni- 
samghasea udakasåtikarn dåtun ti. kim pana {таш Visåkhe 
etthavasam sampassamånå tathágatam atthe verüni yåcastti. 
idhéham bhante dåsim ånåpesim : gaccba je åråmam gantvå 
kålam árocehi kålo bhante nitthitam bhattan ti, atha kho så 
bhente dåst åråmarn gantvå addasa bhikkhü nikkhittactvare 
kåyam ovassåpente, disvåna n’ atthi åråme bhikkhd, åjivakå 
kåyam ovassåpentiti yenåham ten’ upasamkami, upasamka- 
mitvå mam etad avoca n’ atth' ayye åråme bhikkhü, &jivaká 
küyam ovassüpentiti. asuci bhante naggiyam patikkülam. 
imåbarn bhante atthavasam eampassamáná icchámi samghassa 
yåvajivam  vassikasátikam datum. |7 pana ca param 
bbante ágantuko bhikkhu na vithikusslo na gocarakusalo 
kilanto pindüya carati. so me ågantukabhattam bbuüjitvà 
vithikusalo gocarakusalo akilanto pindåya carissati. imáham 
bhante atthavasam sampassamånå iochåmi samghassa yåve- 
jivam &gantukebhattam datum. рипа ca param bhante 
gamiko bhikkhu attano bhattam pariyesamåno satthå và 
vibåyissati, yattha уй våsam gantukåmo bhavissati tattha 
vikåle upagacchissati kilanto addhånam gamissati. so me 
gemiksbhattam bhunjitvà satthá na vihüyissati, yattba 
vüsam gantukámo bhavissati tattha kálena upagacchissati 
akilanto addhánam gamissati. imåbam bhante atthavasam 
sampassamånå icchámi samghassa yåvajivam gamikabhattam 
datum. |181 ропа ca param bhente gilånasss bhikkhuno 
варрдуёоі bhojanåni alabbantasss åbådho vå abhivaddhissati 
kålamkiriyå +á bhavissati. tassa me gilanabhattam bhuttassa 


VII. 18. 9-13.] MAIÅ VAGGA. 293 


åbådho na abhivaddhissati kålamkiriyå па bhavissati. imá- 
ham bhante atthavasam sampassamånå iochámi samghassa 
yAvajivam gilånabbettam dåtum. ропа ca peram bhante 
gilånupatthöko bhikkhu attano bhattam pariyeeamáno gilå- 
nasaa ussüre bhattam niharissati bhattacchedam karissati. 
so me gilünupatthükabhattam bhuüjitvà gilánassa kålene 
bhattam. niharissati bhattacchedam na karissati. imåham 
bhante atthavasam sampassamåuå icchåmi samghassa yáva- 
jivam gilånupattbåkabbattam détum. ||9|| pune ca param 
bhante gilanassa bhikkhuno sappåyåni bhesajjáni alsbhan- 
tasaa åbådho vå abhivaddhissati kålamkiriyå vå bhavissati. 
tama me gilfnabhesajjam paribbuttasaa åbådho na abhi- 
vaddhiseati kAlamkiriyA na bhavissati. im&ham bhante 
&tthavasam sampassamáná iochåmi saamgbassa yávaji- 
vam gilinabhessjjam dåtum. puna ca param bhante 
bbagavatå Andhakavinde dasånisamse sampassamånena 
yügu anufliåtå. ty bam bhante ånisamse sampessamånå 
icchami samghassa yåvajivam dhuvayågum dåtum. ||10 || 
idha bhante bhikkhuniyo Aoiravatiyå nadiyå vesiyühi 
saddhim naggå ekatitthe nahåyenti. tå bhante vesiyA 
bhikkhuniyo uppandeeum: kim nu kho náma tumhåkam 
ayye daharånam brahmacariyam ciņņe, nanu náma kåmå 
peribhuüjitabbá, уада jinnå bhavissanti tadå brahmacariyam 
carissatha, evam tumbákam ubho antá pariggahità bha- 
vissantiti tå bhante bhikkhuniyo veiyåbi uppandiyamånå 
mankü shesum. asuci bhante måtugåmassa naggiyam 
jeguccham patikkülem.  im&ham bhente atthevasam sam- 
passamånå icchåmi bhikkhunisamghassa yávajivam udaka- 
såtikam dåtun ti. 111 kim рапа tvam Visikhe ånisamsam 
sampassamånå tathügatam attha veråoi yécastti. idba 
bhante disåeu vassam vuttbå bhikkhà Sávatthim Agacchi- 
ssanti bhagavantam dassanüya, te bhegavantam upesamka-. 
mitvå pucchissanti: itthannámo bhante bhikkhu kålamkato, 
tasa kA gati ko abhisamparáyo 'ti. tam bhagavå vyüka- 
keriseati sotåpattiphale và sakadågåmiphale và anàg&mipbale 
vå arahattapbale vå. ty åham upasamkamitvå pucchissámi : 
ågatapubbå nu kho bhente tena ayyena Såvatthiti. |112] 
васе 'me vakkhanti ågatapubbå tena bhikkhuné Sávatthiti, 


294 MAHÅVAGGA. [VIII 18. 13-16. 1. 


nittham etths gacchissåmi nissamsayam paribhuttam tena 
ayyena vassikasåtikå và &gantukabhattam vå gamikabhattam 
vå gilánabhattam vá gilånupatthåkebhettam vá gilánabhe- 
eajjam vå dhuvayågu và 'ti. tasså me tad anussarantiyå 
påmujjam jåyissati, pamuditaya piti jáyissati, pitimandya 
kåyo passambhissati, passaddhakåyå eukham vedayissåmi, 
sukhiniyå cittam samádhiyisseti, så me bhavissati indriya- 
bhávaná balabbåvanå bojjhefigabbåvanå imåbam bhante 
ÅDisamsam sam passamånå tatbågstam attha var&ni yåcåmiti. 
180 sådhu sádhu Visdkhe, s&dhu kho tvam Visåkhe imam 
Ånieamsam sampesssmán& tathágatam attha varåni våcasi. 
anujånåmi te Visåkhe attha varániti. atha kho bhagava 
Visákham Migåramåtaram imáhi gáth&hi anumodi : 
yñ annapánam atipamoditå silüpspanná eugatases såviké 
dadåti dánam abhibhuyya maccheram sovaggikam soka- 
nudam sukhávaham,| 
dibbam så labbate 4yum ågamma maggam virajam ananga- 
nem, 
så pufifukåmå sukhini anámayá eaggamhi kåyamhi ciram 
pamodetiti. 


atha kho bhagavå Visåkbam Migåramåtaram imåhi gåthåbi 
anumoditvå uttháy&san& pakkåmi. |141 аһа kho bhagavå 
etasmim nidáue dbsmmikatham Кабуд bhikkhü &mantesi: 
anujànàmi bhikkhave vassikas&tikam &gantukabha- 
ttam gamikabhattam gilànabbattam gilánu- 
patthåkebhattam  gilánabhesejjam dhuvayågum 
bhikkhunisamghasea udakasátikan ti. |115 1151 
Visåkhåbhånavåram. 


tena kho pana samayena bhikkhü panitåni bhojanani 
bhuüjitvà mutthasastt asampajüná niddam okkamenti, tesam 
mutthassatinam asampaj&n&ánam niddam okkamantánam supi- 
nantes asuci muccati, senåsanam asucinà makkhiyati. atha 
kho bhagavå åyasmatå Anandena pacchüsamapena senåss- 
nacårikam &hindanto addasa senåsanam asucinå makkhitam, 
disvåna ayasmantam Ánandam Ашап{евї: kim etam Ananda 
sendsanam makkhitan ti. etarahi bhante bbikkhü penitåni 


VIIL. 16. 1-17. 1.] MAHAVAGGA. 295 


bhojanåni bhuiijitvé mutthassati asampajáná niddam okka- 
menti, tesam . . . asuci muooati, tayidam bhagavá senåsanam 
asucinà makkhitan ti. Hl] evam etam Ananda evam etam 
Ananda, muccati hi Anands mutthessatinam asampejkuånem 
niddam okkamantánam supinantena asoci. ye te Ananda 
bhikkhü upstthitesati sampsjånå niddam okkamenti tesam 
amci na muccati, ye pi te Ananda puthujjenå kåmesu vita- 
тада tesam pi asuci па muocati. atthdnam etam Anande 
anavakåso yam arahato asuci mucoeyyå 'ti. atha kho bhagavå 
etasmim nidáno dhammikatham Кабуд bhikkhà Amantesi: 
idhåham bhikkhave Ánandena pacohåsamanena senåsanacåri- 
kam åhindanto addasam senüsanam asacinå makkhitam, 
disvåna Anandam &mantesim : kim etam Ananda... 
(281,2) . . . arahato asuci mucceyyé "ti. ||2|| рейс’ ime 
bhikkhave &dinavà mutthassatissa asampajdnessa niddam 
okkamayato: dukkham supati, dukkha patibujjhati, papa- 
kam supinam pasesti, devstå na rakkhanti, asuci muccati. 
ime kho bhikkhave райса ådinavå matthassatiasa asampaja- 
nassa niddam okksmayato. paüc' ime bhikkhave ánisamsá 
upatthitasatisss sampajanessa niddam okkamayato: sukham 
supati, sukham patibujjhati, na påpskem supinam passati, 
devstå rakkbanti, asuci na muccati. ime kho bhikkhave 
pañca Ånisamså upatthitasatissa sampajånassa niddam okka- 
mayato. apujånåmi bhikkhave kayaguttiya civareguttiyå 
sendsanaguttiyé niatdanan ti. |3|| tena kho pana sama- 
yena atikhuddakam nisidanam ne sabbam sendsanam gopeti. 
bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujdpami bhikkhave 
yåvamahantam peccattharanam  &kankhati tivamahantem 
paccsttharanam kåtun ti. |14 11611 


tena kho pana samayena Ayasmato Ánendassa upajjhá- 
yassa dyasmato Belatthasissssa thullakacchébadho hoti. 
tassa lesikáya civaråni kaye lagganti, (Апі bhikkhü udakena 
temetvå-temetvå apakaddhanti. addass kho bhagavå senå- 
sanacárikam åhindanto te bhikkhü táni civaráni udakena 
temetvå-temetvå apakaddhante, disvåna yene te bhikkhü 
ten’ upasamkami, upasamkemitvà te bhikkhü etad avoca: 
kim imassa bhikkhave bhikkhuno ábádho ‘ti. imassa bhante 


296 MAHAVAGGA. УШ. 17. 1-90. 2. 


&yasmato thullakacchåbådbo, lasikåya civaråni kåye lagganti, 
tåni mayam udakena temetvå-temetvå apakeddbåmå 'ti. atha 
kho bhagavå etasmim nidåne dbammikatham katvá bhikkhû 
&mantesi: enujånåmi bhikkhave yasss kandu và pilaká vá 
assåvo vå thullakacch4 vå Abadho kandupeticchådin ti. 


11171 š 


atha kho Visåkhå Migåramåtå mukhapufichanacola- 
kam &dáya yena bbagavå ten” upasamkami, upasamkamitvå 
bhagavantam abhivüdetvà ekemantam nieidi, ekamentam 
nisinná kho Vis&khà Migåramåtå bhagavantam etad evoca: 
patiganhátu me bhante bhagavå mukhapuüchanacolakam yam 
mama assa digharattam hitüya sukh&yá 'ti. patiggaheei 
bhagavå mukhapofichanecolakam. atha kho bhagavå Visá- 
kham Migåramåtaram dhammiy& kathêya sandassesi . . . 
sampebemsesi. atha kho Vis&khà Migåramétå bhagavatà 
dhammiyå katháya eandassità . . . sampshamsitå utthdya- 
sand bhagavantam abhividetvé padakkhinam katvå pakkåmi. 
atha kho bhegavå etasmim nidáne dhemmikatham katvå 
bhikkhà &manteei: anujånåmi bbikkhave mukhapuücha- 
necoleken ti. [|1/18]| 


tena kho pana samayena Rojo Mallo &yasmato Ánan- 
dasea sahåyo hoti. Rojassa Mallassa khomapilotikå Ayasmato 
Anandassa hatthe nikkhittà hoti &yasmato oa Anandassa 
khomapilotikåya attho hoti. bhagavato etam attham ároce- 
sum. &nujánàmi bbikkbave pañcah’ angehi samannågatasss 
vissåsam gahetum: sandittho ca hoti sambhatto ca Alapito 
ca jivati ca jånåti gahite me attamano bbavisestiti. anujá- 
nami bhikkhave imehi рейсаћ’ afigebi samanndgatassa visså- 
sam gahetun ti. 111191 


tena kho pana samayena bbikkhünam paripunnam hoti 
tictvaram attho ca hoti parissåvanehi pi thavik&ühi pi. 
bhagavato etam attham Arocesum. snujånåmi bhikkhave 
parikkh&recolakan ti. |1] atha kho bhikkbünam etad 
ahosi: yåni táni bbagevet& anufiflåtåni ticivaran ti và vassi- 
kasñtiká "ti và nisidanan ti và paccattharagan ti vå kandupa- 


VIII. 90. 2-28. 1.) MAHÄVAGGA. 297 


ticchåditi vå mukhepufichanacolakan ti và parikkhåracolakan 
ti và, aabbåni tåni adhitthátebbáni nu kho udåhu vikappe- 
tabbüniti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. anujånåmi 
bhikkbeve ticivaram adhitthåtum na vikappetum, vasaika- 
edtikam vassinam cåtumåsam adhitthåtum tato param 
vikappetum, nisidanam adhitthátum na vikappetum, pacca- 
ttharanam adhitthátum na vikappetum, kandupatiochådim 
yåva åbådhå adhitthátum tato param vikappetum, mukha- 
puiohsnacolakam adhitthátum na vikappetur, parikkhåra- 
colakam adbitthátum na vikappetun ti. |12120 11 


atha kho bhikkhünam etad shosi: kittskam pacchimam nu 
kho civaram vikappetabban ti.  bhagavato etam attham 
årocesum. anujânåmi bhikkhave dydmena atthafigulam 
sugatangulena caturangulam vitthatam pacchimam civarsm 
vikappetun ti tena kho pana samayena åyasmato Mahå- 
Кавввраввв pamsukülaksto garuko hoti. bhagavato etam 
attham årocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave suttaldkbam kåtun 
ti. vikenno hoti bbagavato etam attham årocesum. anu- 
jånåmi bhikkhave vikennem uddharitun ti. outta okiri- 
yanti. bhagavato etam attbam Ёгооевшр. anuján&mi bhikkh- 
ave anuvütam paribbandam åropetun ti. tena kho 
pana samsyena samghåtiyå pattå lujjenti. bhagavato etam 
attham Grocesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave atthapadakem 
kåtun ti. 111 tena kho pana eamayena aññatarassa bhikkh- 
uno ticivare kayiramåne ssbbam chinnakam na ppaboti. 
enujànámi bhikkhave dve chinnskåni ekam acchinnakan ti. 
dve chinnakåni ekam achinnakam na ppahoti. anujánámi 
bhikkhave dve acchinnakaéni ekam chinnakan ti. dve 
acchinnekåni ekam chinnakam na ppahoti. anujdnfimi 
bbikkhave envádhikam pi åropetum. па ca bhikkhave 
sabbam acchinnakam dhåretabbam. yo dhåreyya, Apatti 
dukkatassA ’ti. [12 1211] 


tena kho pans samayena aññatarassa bhikkhuno bahum 
civaram uppannam hoti so са tam civaram mátápitunnam 
datukémo hoti. bhagavato etam attham årocesum. måtå- 
pitaro hi kho bhikkhave dadamåne kim vadeyyåms. апијё- 


298 MAHAVAGGA. [YIIL 39. 1-94 1. 


nami bhikkhave måtåpitunnam datum. па са bhikkhave 
eaddhådeyyarn vinipåtetabbam. yo vinipáteyya, åpatti dukka- 
tasså "ti. 1112211 


tena kho рапа samayens afifiataro bbikkhu Andhavene 
civaram nikkbipitvå santaruttarena gámam pindåys påvisi. 
corå tam civaram avaharimsu. во bhikkhu duccolo hoti 
lükhacivaro. bhikkhü evam fhamsu: kisa tvam åvuso 
duccolo lfikbactvaro 'ti. idh&áham åvuso Andhavane civaram 
nikkhipitvà santeruttarens gåmam pipdáya påvisim, oorå 
tam civaram avaharimsu, tenáham duccolo låkhacivaro "ti. 
bhagavato etam attham Årocesum. na bhikkhave santar- 
uttarena gåmo pavisitabbo. yo paviseyya, åpatti dukka- 
(азай ‘ti. |11 tena kho pana aamayena ёувашё Ánando 
asatiyå santeruttarena gámam pipdåya pavisi.  bhikkhü 
Ayasmantam Anandam etad avocum: nanu kho Avuso Ananda 
bhagavatå pañňattam na santaruttarena gåmo pavisitabbo "ti, 
kisaa tvam Åvuso santaruttarena gámam pavittho 'ti. saccam 
åvuso bhaguvatå paüüattam ne santaruttarena gámo pavisi- 
tabbo ‘ti, арі cáham asatiyå pavittho "ti. bhagavato etam 
attham Arocesum. ||2|| paño’ ime bhikkhave paocayà samghá- 
tiy& nikkhepdya: gilåno vå hoti, vassikasamketam vå hoti, 
nadipáram gantum vá hoti, aggalagutti vihåro và hoti, attha- 
takathinam vå hoti. ime kho bhikkhave райса paccayå 
samghåtiyå nikkbepåya. paño’ ime bhikkhave paccayå 
uttaråsafigassa antaravásakassa nikkhepáya: giláno уй... 
atthatakatbinam và hoti. ime kho bhikkhave райса paccay& 
uttardsangassa antaravasakassa nikkhepåye. paño’ ime bhi- 
kkhave paocayå vassikasåtikåye nikkhepáya: gilåno vå hoti, 
niseimam gantum vå hoti, nedipåram gantum vå hoti, 
aggalagutti vihåro vå hoti, vassikasåtikå akat& vå hoti vippa- 
katå và. ime kho bhikkhave рейса paocayá vassikasåtikåye 
nikkhep&yá "ti. 131981 


tens kho pana samayens aññataro bhikkhu eko vassam 
vasi. tattha manussá samghassa demå 'ti civaráni adamsu. 
atha kho tassa bhikkhuno etad ahosi: bhagavatå pafifiattam 
catuvaggo pacchimo samgho ‘ti, aham c' amhi ekako, ime ca 


ҮШ. 94. 1-6.] MAHAVAGGA. 299 


manusså samghassa demå "ti civaråni adamsu. yam ninåham 
imåni samghikAni civaråni Sdvatthim hereyyan ti. atha 
kho so bhikkhu tåni civaråni ådåya Såvatthim gantvå bhaga- 
vato etam attham frocési. tuyh’ eva bhikkhu tåni cfvaråni 
yåva kathinassa ubbhårdyå ‘ti. ll idha pana bhikkhave 
bhikkhu eko vassam vasati. tatthe manusså samghassa 
demå ”ti civaráni denti. anujånåmi bhikkhave tass’ eva tani 
oivaråni уйча katbinasss ubbhåråyå "і. 121 tena kho pana 
samayens afifiataro bhikkhu utukAlam eko vesi. tatthe 
manusså samghassa demà ‘ti eivaráni adamsu. satha kho 
tama bhikkhuno etad sahosi: bhagavatå paññattam catuvaggo 
pecchimo samgho "ti, aham с’ amhi ekako, ime ca manusså 
samghassa demá ”ti civaråni adameu. yam ndndham imáni 
samgbikåni civaráni S&vatthim hareyyan ti. atha kho 
so bhikkhu tani civaráni &ádáya Såvatthim gantvå bhikkhü- 
nam etam attham årocesi. bhikkhü bhagavato etam attham 
frocesup. anujånåmi bhikkhave sammukbibhütens sam- 
ghena bhájetum. |$ [| idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu utukålam 
еко vasati. tattha manussà samghaasa demå "ti civaråni 
denti anujånåmi bhikkhave tena bhikkhand tani civaråni 
&dhitthátum mayb’ imáni civeråpiti. tassa ce bhikkhave 
bhikkhuno tam civaram snedhitthitene añño bhikkhu &ga- 
echati, amako dåtabbo bhågo. tehi ce bhikkhave bhikkhübi 
tam civaram bhájiyamáne apátite kuse aüfio bhikkhu åga- 
cchati, samako dåtabbo bbågo. tehi ce bhikkhave bhikkhühi 
tam civaram bhåjiyamåne påtite kuse afifio bhikkhu åga- 
echati, nåkåmå databbo bhågo ’ti. [141] tena kho pane sama- 
yena dve bhåtukå thera åyasmå ca Isidåso &yasmü ca 
Isibbatto Såvatthiyam vassam vutthå afiílataram gåmak- 
åvåsam agamamsu. menusså cirassápi thera Agatå ’ti вас1- 
varåni bhattåni adamsu. åvåsikå bhikkh there pucchimsu : 
imáni bhante samgbikåni civaråni there ågamma uppennáni, 
efdiyissanti therå bhågan ti. therå evam åbamsu: yathá 
kho mayam åvuso bhagsvatå dhammam desitam åjånåme 
tumhåkam yeva {апі civaråni уйға kathinassa ubbhåråyå "ti, 
150 tena kho pana samayena tayo bhikkhå Råjagahe 
vasam vasanti. tattha manusså samghassa demå ’ti ofvaråni 
denti. atba kho tesam bhikkhünam etad ahosi: bhagavatà 


300 MAHAVAGGA. [VII]. 94 6-88. 2. 


paññattam catuvaggo pacchimo aamgho ’ti, mayam с' amhå 
tayo jana, ime ca manussá samghassa demå "ti civaråni denti. 
katham nu kho amhehi patipajjitabban ti. tena kho pana 
samayena sambahulà theré åyasmå ca Nilavási &yusmá 
ca Sånavåsi Ayasmé ca Gopako åyasmå ca Bhagu 
åyasmå ca Phalikesandåno Püátaliputte viharanti 
Kukkutåråme. atha kho te bhikkhü  Pátaliputtam 
gantvå there pucchimsu. therå evam &hamsu: ysthá kho 
mayam ётиво bhagavatà dhammam desitam &jánüma tumhå- 
kam yeva tåni civarüni yáva kathinassa ubbháráyá ’ti. 
16124 


tena kho pana samayena åyasmå Upanando Sakya- 
putto Bavatthiyam vassam vuttho aññataram gåmak- 
&vüsam agamåsi. tattha bbikkbO civeram bhájetukámà 
sapnipatimeu. te evam åhamsu: imåni kho åruso samghi- 
kåni civardni bhåjiyissanti, sådiyissasi bbågen ti. &mávuso 
sådiyiesåmiti iato civarabhigam gahetvå aiam åvåsam 
agamåsi. tattha pi bhikkhü ctvaram bhájetukümá sanni- 
patimsu. te pi evam Ahamsu: imåni kho åvuso samghikåni 
ciraråni bhájiyissanti, sádiyiesasi bbågan ti.  &mávuso 
sådiyissåmiti tato pi civarabhågam gehetvé aññam Åvåsam 
agamåsi. tattha pi bhikkhQ civaram bhåjetukåmå eanni- 
patimsu. te pi evam åhamsu: imåni kho åvuso samghikåni 
civaråni bbåjiyissanti, s&diyissasi bbågan ti. åmåvuso sådi- 
yiesAmiti tato pi oivarabhigam gahetvà mahantam civara- 
bhandikam Adaya punad eva Bávatthim paccågaccbi. il] 
bhikkhü evam åhamsu: mehåpuåfio 'ei tram Åvuso Upananda, 
bahum te civaram uppannan ti. kuto me åvuso риййаш, 
idhåbam åvuso Sávatthiyam vessam vuttho aññataram gåmak- 
&vüsam agamásim, tattha bhikkhü civaram bhåjetukåmå 
sanuipatimsu, te mam evam åhamsu: imåvi kho åvuso 
samghikåni civeråni bbåjiyissanti, sádiyissasi bhagan ti. 
&müvuso sådiyiseåmiti tato civarabhågam gabetvå afifiam 
Avüsam egamåsim, tattha pi bhikkhü civaram bhåjetukåmå 
eannipatimsu, te pi mam evam åbamsu: imåni kho åvuso 
samghikåni civaråni bbåjiyissanti, e&ádiyissasi bhågan ti, 
åmåvuso sådiyissåmiti tato pi civarabhågam gahetvå айдат 


ҮШ. 88. 2-36. 1.] MAHÅVAGGA. 301 


åvåsam agamåsim, tattha pi bhikkhü civaram bbåjetukåmå 
sannipatimsu, te pi mam evam &hamsu: imåni . . . sådi- 
yissåmiti tato pi civarabbågam aggahesim, evam me bahum 
civaram uppannan ti. [|2|| kim pana tvam åvuso Upananda 
afifiatra vassam vuttho aññatra etvarabhågam sfdiyissasiti. 
evam ávuso 'ti. ye te bhikkhü appiccbå te ujjhüyanti khi- 
yanti vipåcenti: katham hi náma &yasmá Upanando Sakya- 
putto аййа{та vassam vuttho afifiatra civarabhágam sådi- 
yissatiti. bhagavato etam attham åÅrocesum. saccam kira 
tvam Upananda efifiatra vassam vuttho aññatra civarsbhágam 
shdiyiti. вассат bhagavå. vigarabi buddho bhagavå: 
katham hi náma tvam moghapuriaa afiflatra vassam vuttho 
aññatra civarabhágam sådiyissasi. n’ etam moghapurisa 
&ppasannünam vå pasådåye  pssaennüánem và bhiyyobbå- 
vaya. vigarshitvà dhammikatham Каб bhikkhå dmantesi : 
na bhikkhave aññatra vassam vutthena aññatra civarabhágo 
såditabbo. yo sådiyeyye, åpatti dukkatassé 'ti. [131] tena 
kho pana samayena åyssmå Upanando Sakyaputto eko 
dvisu åvåsesu vasam vasi evam me bahum civaram uppajji- 
esatiti. atha kho tesam bhikkhünam etad ahosi: katham 
nu kho åyasmato Upanandassa Sakyaputtassa civarapativiao 
dåtabbo 'ti. bhagavato etam sttham Arocesum.  detba 
bhikkhave moghapurisassa ekådhippåyam. idba pana 
bhikkhave bhikkhu еко dvisu åvåsesu vassam vasati evam 
we bahum civeram uppajjissatiti. васе amutra upaddham 
amutra upaddham vasati, amutra upaddho amutra upaddho 
civarapativiso dåtabbo, yattha vå pana baehutaram vassti 
tato civarapativiso dåtabbo 'ti. [|4 25 


tena kho pana samayena aüfiatarassa bhikkhuno kucchi- 
vikárüb&dho hoti, so sake muttakarise palipanno seti. atha 
kho bhagavà åyssmatå Anandene pscchAssmanena senâ- 
sanacårikam &hindento yena tassa bhikkhuno vihåro ten’ 
upasamkemi.  addasa kho bhagavå tam bbikkhum sake 
muttakarise palipanuam sayamånam, disvána yena so bhi- 
kkhu ten’ upasamkemi, upasamkamitvà tam bhikkhum etad 
8voca : kim te bhikkhu åbådbo "і. kucchivikåro me bhagavå 
‘ti. atthi pana te bhikkhu upatthdko 'ti. m atthi bhagevå 


302 MAHAVAGGA. [VIII. #0. 1-6. 


"ti. kissa tam bhikkhü na upettbentiti. aham kho bhante 
bhikkhünam akárako, tena mam bhikkhü na upatthentiti. 
iLi atha kho bhagavå åyasmantam Ånandam Amentesi : 
gacchéuanda udakam Ghare, imam bhikkhum nah&pess&ámá 
"ti. eva bhante 'ti kho Ayasma Anando bhagavato patisu- 
nitvà udakam åheritvå bhagavá udakam Asijici &yasmá 
Anando paridhovi, bhagavå sisato aggahesi åyasmå Anando 
pådeto uccáretvà maficake nipåtesum. ||211 athe kho bhagava 
etasmim nidåne etasmim pakarape bhikkhusamgham sanni- 
påtåpetvå bhikkhü patipucchi: atthi bhikkhave amukesmim 
viháre bbikkhu gilàno 'ti. atthi bhagavå 'ti. kim tassa 
bhikkhave bhikkhuno åbådho 'ti. tassa bhante Ayasmato 
kuechivikåråbådho ‘ti еі pana bhikkhave tassa bhi- 
kkhuno upatthako "ti. n’ atthi bbagavå 'ti. kissa tam bhikkbQ 
ne upatthentiti. eso bhante bhikkhu bkikkhünam akárako, 
tena tam bhikkhü ne upatthentiti n’ atthi te bhikkhave 
måtå n' atthi pitå ye te upatthsheyyum. tumhe ce bhi- 
kkhave aññamaññam na upatthsbissatha atha ko carabi 
upattbahissati. yo bhikkhave mam upatthaheyya so gilånam 
upattbaheyye. [[3|| васе upsjjbåyo hoti upsjjbåyena yávaji- 
vam upatthåtabbo, vuttbånassa Agametabbam. sace 
&cariyo hoti åcariyena yåvajivam upattbåtabbo, vutthånams 
&gametabbam. васе saddhivibåriko hoti . . . eace antevå- 
siko hoti . . . васе samånupajjhåyako boti . . . sace samånå- 
cariyako hoti &amán&cariyakena yåvajtvam upattbatabbo, 
vutthånassa ågametabbam. sace na hoti upajjháyo vå Acariyo 
vå eaddhivihüriko và antevüsiko và samånupsjjbåyako vå 
samånåcariyako và eamghene upatthåtabbo. по ce upattha- 
heyya, раі dukkatassa. ||4/| pañcahi bhikkhave angehi 
samannágato gilåno dupattbåko hoti: assppåyakåri hoti, 
sappáye mattam па jånåti, bhessjjam na patisevitå hoti, 
atthakåmesss gilánupatth&kassa yathábhütam åbådbam nåvi- 
kattà hoti abhikkamantam và abhikkametiti patikka- 
mantam và patikksmatiti thitam vå thito ’ti, uppannánam 
sÜririkánam vedanánam dukkhanam tibbånam kharánam 
katukånam asåtånem вашапёрАпат påpeberånem anadhi- 
våsaksjötiko hoti. imebi kho bhikkhave paficah' angebi 
samannágato  giláno dupattháko hoti.. || 5  pañcahi 


VIII. 96. 6-97. 2.] MAHÄVAGGA. 303 


bhikkhave angehi eamannágato gilåno supattháko hoti: 
sappåyakåri hot, sappåye mattam jånåti, bhesajjam pati- 
sevità hoti, atthakámassa gilünupatthákassa yatbåbhåtam 
Abadham Avikatté hoti abhikkamantam vñ abhikkamatiti 
patikkamantam vå patikkematiti thitam vå thito "ti, uppannå- 
nam såririkånam vedanånam dukkhånam tibbånam kharånam 
katukånam as&tànam amanápünam pånaharånam adhivå- 
sakajåtiko hoti. imehi kho bhikkhave райсаћ’ angehi 
samannågato giláno eupattháko hoti. |161 paficahi bhi- 
kkhave engehi samannágato gilánupattháko nálam gilánam 
upattbåtum : па patibalo hoti bhesajjam vidbåtum, sappåyå- 
sappåyam na jånåti asappåyam upandmeti sappåyam spanå- 
meti, åmisantaro gilånam upattháti no mettacitto, jegucchi 
hoti uccáram va passåvam vå khejam và vantam và nihátum, 
na patibalo hoti gilånam külena kálam dhammiyå kathAya 
sandassetum . . . sampahamsetum. imebi kho bhikkhave 
райсаһ' angehi samannågato giláénupattháko nålam gilånam 
upattbåtum. ||7| pañcahi bhikkhave angehi samsnuågato 
gilånupstthåko alam gilånam upattbåtum : patibalo hoti 
bheeajjam samvidhétum, sappáy&eappüyam ján&ti asappåyam 
apanåmeti eapphyam upanámeti, mettacitto gilánam upattbåti 
no Amisantaro, ajegucchi hoti uccáram va passåvam vå khe- 
Jam và ventam và nibátum, patibalo hoti gilånam kålens 
kâlam dhammiyå kath&ya sandassetum . . . sampaham- 
setum. imehi kho bhikkhave paficab' angehi eamannigato 
gilånupattbåko alam gilånam upattbåtun ti. |8126 


tens kho pana samayena dve bhikkhü Kosalesu jana- 
padesu addhánamaggapatipanná honti. te afifiataram åvåsam 
upagacchimsu, tatthe aññstaro bhikkbu gilåno hoti. athe 
kho tesam bhikkhünam etad abosi: bhagavetå kho åvuso 
gilånupatthånam vannitem, hands mayam åvuso imam 
bhikkhum wupatthebemå "ti, te tam upatthahimsu. so tehi 
upatthahiyamáno kålam ekåsi. atha kho te bhikkhü tassa 
bhikkhuno pattactvaram Adaya Såvatthim gantvå bhaga- 
vato etam attham årocesum. ||lj| bbikkhussa bhikkhave 
kålam kate samgho simi pattacivare. api ca gilánupattháká 
anujånåmi bhikkhave samghens ticivaram 


304 MAHAVAGGA. (VIII. 87. 2-4. 


ca pattam ca gilánupatthákánam dátum. evam ca pana 
bhikkhave dåtabbam : tena gilánupatthüákena bhikkhuná 
samgham upasamkamitvà evam assa vacaniyo: itthannåmo 
bhante bhikkhu kålam kato, idam tassa ticivaram ca patto cá 
‘tL vyattena bhikkhund patibalena samgho fápetabbo: 
supétu me bhante samgho. itthanndmo bhikkhu kålam kato, 
idam tasaa ticivaram ca patto ca. yadi samghassa patta- 
kallam samgho imam ticivaram са pattam ca gilånupatthå- 
kånam dedeyyas. eså fatti. sunpáàtu me bbante samgho. 
itthannåmo bhikkhu kålam keto, idam tassa tictvaram са 
patto са. samgho imam ticivaram ca pettam ca gildnupatthd- 
künam deti. yassåyasmato khamati imessa ticlvarassa ca 
. pattassa ca gilånupatthåkénam дёоат so tunh' assa, yassa na 
kkhamati so bbåseyya. dinnam idam samghena ticivaram 
ca patto ca gilánupatthükánam. kbemati samghassa, tasmA 
tunhi, evam etam dbårayåmiti. ||2|| tena kho pana eamayens 
aññataro såmenero kálam kato hoti. bhagavato etam attham 
åroceaum. såmanerassa bhikkhave kålam kato samgho såmi 
pattacivare. api са gilånupattbåkå bahüpak&rà. anuj&n&mi 
bhikkhave samghene civaram ca pattam ca gilånupattbå- 
kånam dåturn. evam са pana bhikkbave dåtabbam: tena 
gilånupatthåkene bhikkhuná eamgham upasamkamitvà evam 
assa vacaniyo : itthannåmo bhante simanero kålam kato, 
idam tassa civaram ca patto cå "і. vyattena bhikkhunå 
patibalena samgho fiåpetabbo: sunåtu me bbante samgho. 
ittbannåmo såmanero kålam kato, idam tassa civaram са 
patto ca. yadi samghassa pattakallam, samgho imam 
civaram ca рабат ca gilánupatthákánam dadeyya. eså 
fiatti.  sunåtu me bhante samgho. itthannåmo såmanero 
kålam keto, idam tases civaram ca patto ca. samgho imam 
civaram ca pattam ca gilånupettbåkånam deti. yassåyasmato 
khamati imassa civarassa са pattassa ca gilånupattbåkånem 
dånam во tunh’ assa, yassa na kkhamati so bhåseyye. dinnam 
idam samghene civaram ca pstto са gilånupetthåkånam. 
khamati samgbasse, tasmå tunbi, evam etam dbhárayámiti. 
131 tena kho pana samayena aüilataro bhikkhu ca såmanero 
са gildnam upattbshimsu. so tehi upatthahiyamáno kálam 
akAsi. atha kho tassa gilAnupatthdkassa bhikkhuno etad 


VIIL 97. 4-98. 2.] MaHAVAGGA. 305 


ahosi: katham nu kho gilånupattbåkassa såmanerassa 
civarapativiso dåtabbo 'ti. bhagavato etam attham 4ro- 
cesum. anujånåmi bhikkhave gilánupatthükassa såmane- 
rama samakam pativisam dåtun ti. | 4] tena kho pana 
samayena aññataro bhikkhu behubhaydo bahuparikkhé- 
ro kAlam kato hoti. bbagavato etam attham årocesum. 
bhikkhossa bhikkhave kålam kate samgho simi pattaci- 
vare. арі са gilånupatthåkå babfipskårå. anujånåmi 
bhikkhave samghena ticivaram ca pattam ca gilånu- 
pattbåkånam dátum, yam tatthe lahubhandam lahupari- 
kkháram tam sammukhibhütena samghena bbåjetum, yam 
tattha garubhandam garuparikklårem tam Agataniga- 
tassa cAtuddisassa samghassa avissajjikam avebhaiigikan ti. 
151271 


tens kho pana samayena айќаѓаго bhikkhu naggo hutvå 
yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavan- 
tam etad avoca: bhagavå hi bbante апекарагіуёуепа appi- 
cchassa santutthassa sallekhassa dhutassa påsådikasse spaca- 
yassa viriyårambhassa vannavüdi. idam bhante naggiyam 
anekaperiyáyeus аррїсоһа!йуа santutthiy& sallekhâya dhu- 
tattåya påsådiketåya apacayåya viriyårambhåye samvattati. 
sådhu bhante bhagsv&.bhikkhünam naggiyam anujånåtd 'ti. 
vigarahi buddho bhagavå: ananucchaviyam moghapuriea 
anenulomikam appatirüpam assimanakam akappiyam akara- 
piyam.,  katham hi nåme tvam moghapuriss naggiyam 
titthiyasamådånam  samádiyissasi. n’ etam moghapuriss 
вррезаппёпат vå pasådåye. vigarahitvå dhammikatham 
katvå bhikkhü Amantesi: ne bhikkhave naggiyam titthi- 
yemamádánam samådiyitabbam. уо samádiyeyya, åpetti 
thullaecayaseá "ti. jll tena kho pana samayena aññataro 
bhikkhu kusaciram nivåsetvå — la — våkaciram nivåsetvå, 
phelekaciram nivåsetvå, kesakambalam nivåsetvå, valakamba- ` 
lam nivåsetvå, ultkapakkbam nivåsetvå — la — ajinakkhi- 
pem nivåsetvå yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamke- 
mitvA bhagavantam etad avoca: bhagavå bhante anekapari- 
yåyena appicchassa . . . vannavådi. idam bhante ajinakkbi- 
pam anekapsriydyena appicohetåya . . . samvattati. s&dhu 


YOL. IIL 20 


306 MAHAVAGGA. (VIII. 26. 3-30. 1. 


bhante bhagsvå bbikkhünam ajinakkbipam anujån&t0 "ti. 
vigarahi . . . akaraptyam. katham bi nåma tvam mogha- 
purisa ajinakkhipam titthiyadhajam dhfressasi. n’ etam 
moghapuriss appasannánam vA pasådåye. vigarahitvA 
dhammikatham katvA bbikkht ámantesi: na bhikkbave 
ajinakkhipam titthiyadhajam dhdretabbam. yo dhireyya, 
Apatti thullaccayasså ‘ti. [2| tena kho репа samayena 
aññataro bhikkhu akkandlam nivåsetvå — la — potthakam 
nivåsetvå yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkemi- 
två bhegaventam etad атоса: bhagavå bhante aneka- 
pariyåyena appiochama . . . vsnnevådi. ayam bhente 
potthako anekapariyåyena appicohatåya . . . samvatta- 
ti. sådhu bhante bhagavA bhikkhünam potthakam anu- 
janatQ ‘ti. vigarahi . . . akarapiyam. — katham hi nå- 
ша {таш moghapurisa potthakam nivdsessasi. п’ etam 
mogbapurisa sppasanninam vA  pesádáya.  vigarahitvá 
dbammikatbem katvA bbikkhü Amantesi: na bhikkhave 
potthako nivüsetsbbo. yo nivåseyya, &patü dukkatassá 
*ü. 13128 


tena kho pane samsyens chabbaggiyá bhikkhü sabbant- 
lak&ni cfvaråni dhårenti, sabbapitakAni ctvaráni dhårenti, 
aabbalohitakåni civaråni dhárenti, sabbamaiijetthek&ni cíva- 
ráni dbårenti, sabbakanháni cfvarani dbårenti, sabbamahå- 
rangarattáni civaråni dhdrenti, sabbemahånåmarattåni ctva- 
råni dhárenti, accbinnadasáni civaråni dhárenti, dighadasáni 
civaráni dbárenti, pupphadasáni civaráni dhárenti, phanada- 
såni civaråni dbårenti, kañoukam dhárenti, tiritakam dh&- 
renti, vethanem  dhárenti. manusså ujjhdyanti khiyanti 
vipåoenti : seyyathåpi gihi kåmabhogino ’ti.  bhagavato 
etam attham Arocesum. па bhikkhave eabbantlakAni ctva- 
råni dhåretabbåni, na sabbapttakAni civaráni dhåretabbåni 
++ + na kaflcukam dháretabbam, na tiritakam dhåretabbam, 
па vethanam dhåretsbbam. yo dháreyye, åpatti dukkatassá 
"ti. [1129 


tena kho pana samayene vassam vuttbA bhikkhü anuppanne 


VIII. 30. 14.) MAHÅVAGGA. š 807 


сітаге pakkamanti pi, vibbbamsuvti pi, Кат pi karonti, så- 
msneråpi petijånanti, sikkham paccakkhåtakåpi patijAnanti, 
antimavatthum sjjhåpannakåpi petijánanti, ummattakápi p., 
khittacittápi р., vedanattápi p., &pattiy& adassane ukkhitta- 
kåpi p., &pettiyà appatikamme ukkhittakåpi p., pApikAya 
ditthiyå appatinissagge ukkbittekåpi p., pandakápi p., 
theyyasamvåsakåpi p., titthiyapakkantakåpi p., tiracchüna- 
getápi p., måtughåtakåpi p., pitughåtakåpi p., erahantaghá- 
taküpi p. bhikkhunidüsakápi p., samghsbhedakApi p., 
lohituppádakápi p., ubhatovyafijanakApi patijånenti. bha- 
gavato etam attham árocesum. ||l|| idha pana bhikkhave 
vassam vuttho bhikkhu anuppanne civare pakkamati. sante 
райгйре gahake dåtabbam. idha pana bhikkhave vassam 
vuttho bhikkhu enuppanne civare vibbbsmati, kálam karoti, 
såmanero patijånåti, sikkham paccakkhatako patijånåti, enti- 
mavatthum ejjhápenneko petijånåti. samgho simi. idha 
pana bhikkhave vasam vuttho bhikkhu anuppanne civare 
ummattako patijanati, . . . papikaya ditthiy& appatinissagge 
ukkbittako petijånåti. «ente patirüpe gåhake dåtsbbam. 
idhe pana bhikkhave vassam vuttho bbikkhu anuppanne 
civare pandako patijånåti, . . . ubhatovyafijanako petijånåti. 
samgho eåmi. |21 idba pena bhikkhave vassam vuttbo 
bhikkhu uppanne civare abhájite pakkamati. sante patirüpe 
gáhake dátabbam. idha pens bhikkhave vasam vuttho 
bhikkha uppanne civare abbåjite vibbhamati, . . . antima- 
vatthum ajjhápannako petijånåti. samgho såmi. idha pana 
bhikkhave vassam vuttho bhikkhu uppanne civere sbhåjite 
ummattako patijånåti, . . . pápikáya ditthiy& appatinissagge 
ukkbittako petijn&ti. sante patirüpe gåhake databbam. 
idha pana bhikkhave vassam vuttho bhikkhu uppaune civare 
abbåjite pandako patiján&ti . . . ubhatovyafijanako patijå- 
nati. samgho sámi. |3| idha pana bhikkhave vasam 
vuttbånam bhikkhünam anuppanne civare samgho bhijjati. 
tattha manus ekasmim pakkbe udakam denti ekesmim 
pakkhe civaram denti samghassa demå 'ti. samghasa' ev’ 
etam. idha pana bhikkhave vassam vuttbånam bhikkhünam 
&nuppanne civare samgho bhijjati. tattha menusså ekasmim 
pakkhe udakam denti, tasmim yeva pakkhe civaram denti 


308 MAHÅVAGGA. [VIII 80. 4-31. 2. 


samghassa demå "і. samglhass' ev’ etam. |41 idha pans 
bhikkhave vassam vutthånam bhikkhünam anuppanne civare 
samgho bhijjati. tattha manusså ekasmim pakkhe udakam 
denti ekasmim pakkhe civaram denti pakkhassa demå "ti. 
pakkhass' ev’ etam. idha pana bhikkhave vassam vutthåuam 
bhikkhünam anuppanne civare samgho bhijjati. tattha ma- 
nusså ekasmim pakkhe udakam denti, tasmim yeva pakkhe 
civaram denti pakkhassa demå ’ti. pakkhass’ ev’ etam. |5 
idha pana bhikkhave vessam vutthånam bhikkbünam up- 
panne civare abbåjite samgho bhijjati sabbesam eamakam 
bhájetabban ti. 1161130 11 


tena kho pana samayena Ayasm4 Revato aññatarassa 
bhikkhuno hatthe åyasmato Såriputtsssa civaram påhesi 
imam civaram therassa dehíti. atha kho so bhikkhu antarå 
magge åyasmato Revatassa vissåså tam civaram aggahesi. 
atha kho åyasmå Revato åyasmatå Såriputtena samågantvå 
pucchi : aham bhante therasss civaram påhesim, sampattam 
tam civaran ti. nåham tam Avuso civaram passåmiti atha 
kho åyasmå Revato tam bhikkhum etad avoca: aham Avuso 
&yasmato hatthe therassa civaram påbesim, kaham tam 
civaran ti. sham bhante üyasmato viseåså tam civaram 
aggabesin ti. bhagavato etam attham &rocesum. lli idha 
рапа bhikkhave bhikkhu bhikkhussa hatthe civaram pehipati 
imam civeram itthannümassa dehíti. so antarü magge yo 
pahinati tassa vissåså ganhåti, suggahitam. yassa pahiyyati 
tassa viseåså ganháti, duggahitam. idha pana bhikkhave 
bhikkhu bhikkhuesa hatthe civaram pabinati imam civaram 
itthannümassa dehiti. so antará magge yassa pabiyyati tassa 
vissåså ganbåti, duggshitam. уо pahinati tassa visskså 
ganhåti, suggahitam. idha pane bhikkhave bhikkhu... 
debiti. во antará magge sunåti yo pahipati во kålam kato 
‘ti. tassa matakaciveram adhitthåti, evddhitthitam. yassa 
pahiyyati tassa vissåså ganbåti, duggabitam. idhe pana 
bhikkhave bhikkhu . . . debiti. во antarå magge supåti 
уаваа pahiyyati so kålam kato 'ti. tassa matakactvaram 
adbitthati, dvådhitthitam. уо pahinati tassa vissåså ganhåti, 
suggahitam. idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu . . . debiti. 


VIII. 31. 2-89. 1.] MAHÅVAGGA. 309 


so anterá magge sunåti ubho kålam kata "і. yo pabinati 
tassa matakacivaram adhitthati, svadhitthitam. увава pahi- 
yyati tassa matakacivaram adhittháti, dvådhitthitem. ||2)) 
idha pane bhikkhave bhikkhu bhikkhussa hatthe civaram 
pehinati imam civaram itthannémassa dammiti. во antard 
magge yo pshinati tassa vissñsñ ganhåti, duggshitam. yasa 
pehiyyati tassa vissÁsÁ ganbåti, euggahitam. idbe pana 
bhikkhave bhikkhu . . . dammiti. во antarå magge yassa 
pehiyyati іама vissisà ganháti, sugguhitam. уо pahinati 
taea vissásA ganhåti, duggahitam. idha pana bhikkhave 
bhikkhu . . . dammiti. so antará magge sunåti yo pahi- 
pati so külam kato 'ti. tassa matakacivaram adhittháti, 
dvådbittbitam. yassa pahiyyati tassa vissåså ganháti, sugga- 
hitam. idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu . . . dammiti. во 
antarå magge eunåti yassa pahiyyati so kålam kato'ti. tassa 
matakacivaram edhitthati, svadhitthitam. yo pahinati tassa 
vissåså ganhåti, duggabitam. idha pane bhikkhave bhikkhu 
+ . . dammiti. so antard magge sunåti ubho kAlam katå "ti. 
yo pahipati tassa matakacivaram adhittháti, dv&dhitthitam. 
yasa pahiyyati tama matakaolvaram adbittbåti, svådhitthi- 
tam. |31311 


&tth' im& bhikkhave måtikå civarassa uppådå- 
ya: simáya deti, katikáya deti, bhikkhüpenüattiyà deti, 
samghassa deti, ubhatoeamghassa deti, vassam vutthasam- 
ghassa deti, ddissa deti, puggalassa deti. вїтйуа deti: 
yávatikA bhikkhü antosimsgatå tehi bbåjetabbam.  katikáya 
deti: sambahulé &våså samånalåbbå honti, ekasmim åvåse 
dinne sabbettha dinnam hoti bbikkhåpaflåsttiyg deti: 
yattba samghassa dhuvakárá kariyanti tatthe demá "ti. 
samghassa deti: sammukbibhåtens samghena bhåjetabbam. 
ubhatosamghassa deti: bahukåpi bhikkhüà honti ek& bhi- 
kkhunt hoti, upaddham dåtabbam. behuképi bhikkhu- 
niyo honti eko bhikkhu boti, upeddham dátabbam. vassam 
vatthasainghessa deti: yåvatikå bhikkhü tasmim åvå- 
se vasam vutthå tehi bh&jetabbam. ådissa deti: yaguyA 
vå bhatte và khüdeniye và civare và senüsane vå bhesajje 


310 MAHÅVAGGA. [YDI. 88. 1. 


và. puggalassa deti: imam civeram itthannåmasse dammi- 
ti. 111821 
civarakkhandhakam atthamam. 


imamhi kbandheke vatthu channavuti. tassa uddånam : 

Råjegahako negsmo disvå Veedliyam gani 
puna Rájagaham gantvá rafifio tam pativedsyi.| 
putto Sålavatikåya Abhayasss bi atrajo 
jivattti kumårena eamkháto Jivako iti.| 
so hi Takkasilam gantvå uggahetvå mahåbhiso 
sattavassikaåbådham natthukammena nåsayi,| 
rafifio bhagandalåbådham Alepene ap&kaddhi, 
mamam ca ittbågåram oa buddhasamgham c' upatthaha.] 
Råjagahako ca setthi, antaganthitikicchitam, 

6 Psjjotasss mahårogam ghatapånena nåsayi.| 
adhikåram ca, Siveyyam, abbisannam sinehati, 
tini uppalahatthena samatimsavirecanam.| 
psketattam varam yåoi, Siveyyam ca patiggahi, 
civaram ca gihidánam enufliidsi tathagato.| 
Rájegahe janapade bahum uppsjji civeram. 
påvåro, kosikam c' eva, kojavo, addhakåsikam,| 
uccávacá ca, santutthi, nigames’ ågamesu ca, 
pathamam pacohá, sadiså, katikA ca, patiharum,| 
bhandågåram, aguttam са, vuttbåpenti tath’ eva ca, 

10 ussaunam, kolåhalam ca, katham bhåje, katham dade,| 
sak'-ütirekabhügene, petiviso каар dade, 
chakanena, situnhi oa, uttaritum, na jAnare,| 
oropento, bhåjanam ca, påtiyå ca, chamáya ca, 
upaciká, majjhe, jiranti, ekato, patthinnena са, 
pharus'-&áchinn'-accibandh&, addasási ubhandite, 
vimammsitvá Sakyamuni enuüfi&ai ticivaram,| 
аййепа atirekene, uppejji, chiddam eva ca, 
cåtuddipo, тагар уёсі datum vassikasátikam | 
Aganta-gami-gilánam upatthákam os bhesajjam 
15 dhuvam udakasátir ca, papitam, atikhuddakam,| 

thullakaochu, mukham, khomam, paripunnam, edhittbå- 


nam, 
pacchimam, kato garuko, vikanno, suttam okiri,| 


MAHÅVAGGA. 


lujjanti, na ppahonti os, anvådhikam, bahüni ca, 
Andhavane, asatiyå, eko vassam, utumbhi са,| 

dve bhåtukå, Råjagahe, Upanando, puna dvisu, 
kucchivikAro, gilåno ubho c' eva, gilåyanå,| 

naggå, kuså, vikeciram, phalako, kesakambalam, 
vale-ulikepakkhem ca, sjinam, akkandlam са, | 
potthekam, nila-pitam ca, lohitam, mafljetthena ca, 


20 kanbå, mabáranga-n&ms, acobinnadasikA tath4,| 


digha-puppha-phanadaså, kaflcu-tirita-vethanam, 
anuppanne pakkamati, samgho bhijjati tåvade,| 
pakkhe dadanti, samghassa, Ayasmå Revato pabi, 
vissåsagåh”, Adbitthåti, attha otvaramåtikå "ti. 


311 


312 


MAHAVAGGA. 


IX. 


Тепа samayena buddho bhagavå Campåyam vibarati 
Gaggerüys pokkharaniyå tire. tena kho pana samsyens 
Kåsten janapadeeu Våsabhagåmo nåma hoti, tattha 
Kassapagotto nåma bbikkhu &vàsiko hoti tantibaddho 
ussukkam ёраопо kinti anågatå ca pesalå bhikkhO ågsorbe- 
yyum ågatå ca pesalå bhikkhü phåsu vihereyyum ayam ca 
åvåso vuddbim virü]him vepullam åpejjeyyå ’ti. tene kho 
pana samayena sambahulå bhikkhü Kåsisa cårikam caramånå 
yena Våsabhagåmo tad avasarum. addasa kho Kassapagotto 
bhikkhu te  bhikkhü dfrato ‘va Agacchante, disvins 
åsanam  paüü&pesi padodakam pådapitham pAdakathali- 
kam upanikkhipi paccuggentvà pattactvaram patiggahed 
påniyena , ápucohi nahåne ussukkam akAsi useukksm pi 
akåsi yåguyå khådaniye bhattasmim. atha kho team 
ágantukánam bhikkhünam etad ahosi: bhaddako kho ayam 
Avuso åvåsiko bhikkhu, nabåne ussukkam karoti ussukkam pi 
karoti yåguyå khådaniye bhattasmim, handa mayam üvuso 
idh’ eva Våsabbagåme nivåsam kappemå 'ti atha kho te 
&gantuká bhikkhü tatth’ eva Våsabhagåme nivåsam kappe- 
sum. 111 atha kho Kassapsgottasss bhikkhuno etad ahosi: 
yo kho imesam ågantukånem bhikkhünam &gantukakilamatho 
so patippassaddho, ye р’ ime gocare sppakataüüuno te 
dân’ ime gocare pakatafifluno. dukkaram kho pana pere 
kulesu yAvajivem ussukkam kåtum vififiatti ca mańussånam 
smenåpå. yam nfinfham па ussukkam kereyyam yåguyå 
kbådaniye bhattasmin ti. so па ussukkam akåsi yågoyå 
khAdaniye bhattasmim. аа kho tesam ágantukAnam bhi- 


IX. 1, 2-5.] MAHAVAGGA. 313 


kkhünam etad ahosi : pubbe khv åyam åvuso Avasiko bhikkhu 
nahåne ussukkam saksi ussukkam pi akåsi yåguyå kbå- 
daniye bhattasmim, so dán' Ayam na ussukkam karoti yåguyå 
khádeniye bhettasmim. duttho dan’ åyam åvuso åvåsiko 
bhikkhu, handa mayam Avuso åvåsikam bbikkhum ukkhipåmå 
"ti. 121 atha kho te ågantukå bhikkhü sannipatitvé Kassa- 
pegottam bbikkbum etad avocum: pubbe kho tvam åvuso 
nahåne ussukkam karosi ussukkam pi karosi yåguyå kbå- 
daniye bhattasmim, so dåni tvam na ussukkam karosi yáguyà 
kh&daniye bbattasmim. Apattim tvam Avuso Apanno, passas 
etam Apattin ti. n’ atthi me åvuso åpetti yam aham 
paseeyyan ti. atha kho teågantukå bhikkhà Kassapagottam 
bhikkham Apattiyå adassane ukkhipimsu. atha kho Kassa- 
pagottama bhikkhuno etad ahosi: eham kho etam na jånåmi 
âpatti va ead andpatti vi Apanno с’ amhi an&panno vå 
ukkhitto c' emhi anukkhitto vi dhammikena vA adhammi- 
kena vA kuppena và akuppens vå tbånårshena và atthånA- 
rahena vá yam nånåbam Campam gantvå bhagavantam 
etam ваш puocheyyan ti. ||31 atha kho Kassapagotto 
bhikkhu senåsanam samsåmetvå pattacivaram ådåya yena 
Campå tena pakkåmi, anupubbens yena Campa yena bhagavå 
ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagaventam abhivådetvå 
ekamantam nisidi.  &oipnam kho pan’ etam buddhánam 
bhagaventánam ågantukehi bbikkhühi saddhim patisammodi- 
tom. atha kho bhagavà Kassapagottam bhikkhum etad 
avoca: kacoi bhikkhu khamaniyam, kacoi yåpanlyam, kacci 
appakilamathena addhánam gato, kuto ca tvam bhikkhu 
Agacchasiti. khamaniyam bhagavå, y&paniyam bbagava, 
appakilamathena cáham bhante addhánam ágato.||4|| atthi 
bhante Kasisu jenapadesu Våsabhagåmo nåma, tattháham 
bhagavå åvåsiko tentibeddho ussukkam üpanno kinti anå- 
gatå ca pesalå bhikkhü Agaccheyyum ágatá ca реаа]А bbikkhü 
phásu vihareyyum ayam са Aviso vuddhim virü]him vepullam 
åpajjoyyå 'ti atha kho bhante sambahulå bbikkhà Kåsisu 
cárikam caramånå yena Våssbhegåmo tad avasarum. adda- 
sam kho sham bhante bhikkhü dürsto 'va &gaochante, 
disvána ёзара pafiååpesim . . . афа kho tesam bhente 
&gantuküánam bhikkhünam etad sahosi: bhaddsko . . . atha 


314 MAHÅVAGGA. X. 1. 6-8. 


kho te bhante dgantukA bbikkbå tatth' eva Våsabhagåme 
nivàsam kappesum. tasas mayham bhante elad ahosi: yo 
kho ... bbettasmin ti. во kho sham bhante na ussukkam 
skåsim . . . atha kho tesam bhante ågantukånem .. . 
паһАпе ussukkam karoti ussukkam pi karoti yüguyà khi- 
daniye bhattasmim, so dán' åyam na ussukkam karoti ... 
atha kho te bhante Agantukå bhikkhü sannipatitvå mam etad 
avocum: pubbe kho . . . passeyyan ti. atha kho te bhante 
Agaotuké bhikkhü mam åpattiyå adassane ukkhipimsu. tasa 
шауһаш bhante etad ahosi: aham kho . . . puocheyyan ti 
tato aham bhegavå AgacchAmiti [|5| апёра eså bhikkho 
n’ eså Apatti, anåpanno 'si na 'si Apanno, anukkhitto ‘si па ‘ai 
ukkbitto, adhammikena 'si kammens ukkhitto kuppens attbå- 
nårahena.  gaocha tvam bhikkhu tatth' eva Vasabhagime 
nivåsam kappehiti evam bbante ‘ti kho Kassapagotto 
bhikkhu bhagavato patisunitvA utthåyåsanå bhagavantam 
abhivådetvå padakkbinam katvå yene Våsabhagåmo tena 
pakkAmi. ||6|| atha kho tesam &gentukünam bhikkhünam 
ahud eva kukkuccam ahu vippatiairo: aldbh& vata no na 
vata no låbbå, dulladdham vata no na vata no suladdbam, ye 
mayam suddham bhikkhum anåpettikam avatthusmim aká- 
rane ukkhipimhá. handa mayam &vuso Campam gentré 
bhagsvato sautike socayam восауаќо desemå 'ti. atha kho te 
ÉgantukA bhikkhü senåsanam samsåmetvå pattacivaram üdáya 
yens Camp4 tene pekkemimsu, anupubbens yena Campa 
yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitvå bhaga- 
vantam abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidimsu.  &oinpam kho 
. ++ patisammoditum. atha kho bhagavà te bhikkhü etad 
&voca : kacoi bhikkhave khamantyam, kacoi уйрепіуаш, 
kacoi appakilamathena eddhånam Agata, kuto са tumhe 
bhikkhave Agacchathé ”ti. khamaniyam bhagavå, yàpani- 
yam bhagavd, appakilamsthena ca mayam bhante addbl- 
nam Agata. attbi bhante Kåsisu janapadesu Visabbe- 
gåmo nima, tato mayam bhagavá ágscobámá "1. [71 
tumhe bhikkhave åvåsikam bhikkhum  vkkhipitthá ’t. 
evam bhante ‘ti.  kismim bhikkhave vatthusmim kå- 
rane ‘ti. avatthusmim bhagavå akárepe 'ti. vigarabi 
buddho bhagavå : enanucchaviyam bhikkhave ananulomi- 


IX. 1. 8-2.2.) MAHÅVAGGA. 315 


kam . . . akaraniyam. katham hi náma tumhe mogha- 
purisá suddham bhikkhum anåpettikem avatthusmim акё- 
rane ukkhipissatha. n’ etam moghapuriså appasannánam 
vå pasiddya, vigarahitva dhammikatbam ketvå bhikkhü 
&mantesi: na bhikkhave suddho bhikkhu anåpattiko ava- 
tthusmim akárepe ukkhipitsbbo. yo ukkhipeyya, Apatti 
dukkatasså "ti. |8] atha kho te bhikkhå utthåyåsanå 
ekamsam uttarüsangam karitvà bhagavato pådesu siraså 
nipatitvå bhegavantam etaed avooum: accayo no bhante 
socagamå yathå bale yathå mü]he yatbå akusale ye mayam 
suddbam bhikkhum anåpettikam avatthusmim akårane ukkhi- 
pimhå, tesa no bhante bhagavå accayam ассауаќо pati- 
geybåtu åystim samvaråyå 'ti. taggha tumhe bhikkhave 
eccayo accagamå ysth& bale yathå mü]he yathá akusale ye 
tumhe suddham bhikkhum anápattikam avatthusmim aká- 
rane ukkhipittha. yato ca kho tumhe bhikkhave accayam 
accayato disvå yathådhammam patikarotha tam vo mayam 
petiganhåme, vuddhi h’ eså bhikkhave ariyassa vinaye yo 
aocayam aocayato disvå yeth&dbemmam petikaroti åyatim 
eam varum Apajjatiti. 11911111 


tena kho репе samsyens Oampáyam bhikkhû evarüpáni 
kammåni ksronti: adhammena vaggakammam  karonti, 
adhammens samaggakammam karonti, dhammena vaggak. 
k, dhammapatiripakena vaggak. k., dhammapatirüpakena 
samaggak. k., еко pi ekam ukkhipati, eko pi dve ukkhipati, 
eko pi sambahule ukkhipati, еко pi samgham ukkh., dve pi 
ekam ukkhipenti, dve pi dve ukkh., dve pi sambahule ukkh., 
dve pi samgham ukkh., sembehulápi ekam ukkh., sambehu- 
lápi dve ukkh., sambaholåpi sambahule ukkh., sambshulåpi 
samgham ukkh., samgho pi samgham ukkhipati. |1] ye te 
bhikkhü appicché te ujjháyanti khiyanti vipåcenti: katham 
bi пёте Campåyarn bhikkhü evarüpáni kammáni kariseanti : 
adhammens vaggakammam karissanti, . . . dhammapatir(- 
pakena samaggakammarn karissanti, eko pi ekam ukkhipissati 
. samgho рі samgham ukkhipissatiti. atha kho te 
bhikkhû bbagavato etam sttham arocesum, saccam kira 
bhikkhave Campáyarn bhikkhd evarüpàni kammáni karonti : 


316 MAHÅVAGGA. [IX. 9. 2-3. 1. 


adhammene vaggakammam karonti . . . samgho рі samgham 
ukkhipetiti. saocam bhagav& vigarahi buddho bhagavå: 
ananuochaviyam bhikkhave tesam moghapurisánam ananu- 
lomikam . . . akaraptyam. katham hi nåma te bhikkhave 
moghapuriså evarüpáni kammåni karisanti: adhamumena 
vaggakammam karissanti . . . samgbo pi samgham ukkhi- 
piesati. п’ etam bhikkhave appasannánam vå разАдАув. 
vigarabitvå dhammikatham katvå bhikkhà &mantesi. [21 
&dhammena oe bhikkhave vaggakammam akammam па ca 
karaniyam. adhammena samsggakemmam akammam па е 
karaniyam . . . dhammapetirdpakena samaggskanmam 
&kammam na ca karaniyam, eko pi ekarp ukkhipati akammam 
na ca kerapiyam . . . samgho рі samgham ukkhipati aka- 
mmam na ea karapiyam. [13] cattér’ imáni bhikkhave 
kammáni: adhammens vaggakemmam, adhammena sam- 
aggakammam, dhammena vaggakammam, dhammena sam- 
aggakammam. tatra bhikkhave yam idam adhammens 
vaggskammam idam bhikkhave kammam adhammatté 
vaggattå kuppam atthàn&raham. па bhikkhave evarüpam 
kammem kAtabbam па ca mayá evarüpam kammam аппййф- 
tam. tatra bhikkhave yam idam адаш тепе samagga- 
kammam idam bhikkhave kammam adhammattå koppam 
... anuññåtam. tatra bhikkhave yam idam dhammena 
vaggakammam idam bhikkhave kemmam vaggatth 
kuppam . . . anufifiåtam. tatra bhikkhave yam idam 
dhammena samaggakammam idam bhikkhave kammam 
dhammattå samaggattå akuppam thandraham.  evarüpam 
bhikkhave kammam k&tabbam evarüpem са mayá kammam 
anuññátam. tasmåt iha bhikkhave evarüpam kammam 
karissåma yad idam dhemmens samsggan ti, evañ hi vo 
bhikkhave sikkhitabban ti. 14191 


tena kho pana samayena ohabbaggiyå bbikkht evarü- 
påni kammáni karonti: adhammena vaggakammam karonti, 
adhammena samaggakammam k., dhammens vaggak. k» 
dhemmapatirüpskena таррак. k., dhammap. samaggak. Е, 
flattivipannam pi kammam keronti snussávanasampannam, 
anuseAvanavipannam pi kammam karonti flattisampennam, 


13.14] MAHÅVAGGQA. | 317 


flattivipannem pi anussåvanavipennam pi kammam karonti, 
afiflatråpi dbammå kammam karonti afifiatrapi vinay& k. k., 
aññatråpi satthu såsanå k k, patikutthakatam pi kammam 
karonti adhammikam kuppam etthán&árabam. уе te bhikkhü 
eppiochá te ujjhåyanti khiyanti vipåcenti : katham hi піша 
ehabbaggiyå bbikkhü  evarüpáni kemmåni  karissanti : 
eadbammena vaggakammam karissanti . . . patikutthakatam 
pi kammam karissanti kuppam atthünárahan ti. atha kho te 
bhikkhü bhagavato etam ettham årocesum. вассат kira 
bhikkhave chabbaggiyå bhikkhd evarüpáni kammáni karonti: 
adhammena vaggakammam karonti — la — petikutthakatam 
рі kammam karonti adbammikam kuppam atthánárahan ti. 
васса bhagavå. — la — vigarshitvà dhammikatham katvå 
bhikkhà Amantesi: 1111 adhammena ce bhikkhave vagga- 
kammam akammam ne ca kareniyam . . . dhammapatirü- 
pakena samaggakammam akammam па са karaniyam, flatti- 
vipannam ce bhikkhave kammam anussåvanasempannem 
akammam па са karaniyam, anussåvanavipannam ce bhikkh- 
ете ksmmam fiattisampannam ak. na ca k., flattivipannam 
oe bhikkhave kammam anussávanavipanpam sk. na ca k., 
afifistråpi dbammå Кашат ak. na ca k., annatråpi vinayå 
kammam ak. na ca k., afifliatråpi satthu såesnå kammam ak. 
na ca k., patikutthakatam ce bhikkhave kammam adhammi- 
kam kuppam atthånårabam akammam na са kerentyam. [|2 |j 
che yimåni bhikkhave kammåni : adhammakammam vagga- 
kammam sameggakammem åhammapstiråpekena vagga- 
kammam dhammapatirüpakena samaggakammam dbammene 
omnes  katamam ca bhikkhave adhamma- 
kemmam. flattidutiye ce bhikkhave kamme ekåys flattiyé 
kemmam karoti na ca kammavicam anussáveti, adbamma- 
kammam. fiattidutiye ce bhikkhave kamme dvihi flattthi 
kammam karoti na ca kammavácam onussåveti, adbamma- 
kemmam. flettidutiye ce bhikkhave kamme ekáya kamma- 
vácáya kammam karoti na ca üattim thapeti, adbamma- 
ksmmam. fiattidutiye ce bhikkhave kamme dvihi kamma- 
våcåhi kammam karoti na ca fiattim thapeti, adhamma- 
kammam. ||3|| flatticatuttho ce bhikkhave kamme ekåys 
fiattiyA kammam karoti na ca kammavåcam anussåveti, 


318 MAHÅVAGGA. fIX. 3.4-7. 


adhammakammam. fiatticatutthe oe bhikkhave kamme dvthi 
fiattihi kammam karoti . . . tihi flattibi kammam karoti . . . 
catühi Øettibi kammam karoti na ca kammavácam anussåveti, 
adhammakammam. flatticatutthe ce bhikkhave kamme ekáya 
kammavåcåya kammam karoti . . . dvihi kammavücihi 
kammam karoti . . . tthi kammavåcåhi kammam karoti.. . 
cathhi kammavåcåhi kammam karoti na ca fattim thapeti, 
adhammakammam. idam vuocati bhikkhave adhamma- 
kammam. |4|| katamam ca bbikkhave vaggekammem 
flattidutiye ce bhikkhave kamme yåvatikå bhikkhü kamma- 
ppattå te anågatå honti, chandårsbånam chando an&heto 
hoti, sammukbhibhütà patikkosanti, vaggakammam. ñatti- 
dutiye ce bbikkhave kamme yávatiká bhikkhü kammappatts 
te ågaté honti, ohendårsbånam chando anñhato hot, 
sammukhibbåtå petikkossnti, vaggakemmam. —fisttidutiye 
ce bhikkhave kamme yåvatikå bhikkhü kammeppattå te 
Agatå honti, chandérah4nam ohando åhato hoti, sammukb!- 
bhütá patikkosanti, vaggskammam. ñatticatutthe ев... 
(the same three cases are repeated here) . . . vaggakammam 
idam vuccati bhikkhave vaggakammam. |5|| katamem сё 
bhikkhave samaggakammam. flattidutiye oe bhikkhave 
kamme yåvstikå bhikkhü kammappettå te ågatå honti, 
chandårahånam chando 4hato hoti, sammukhibhité ns 
patikkosanti, samaggakammam, fistticatutthe oe . . . na 
patikkoeanti, sameggakammam. idam vuccati bhikkhave 
samaggakammam. |61 katamam ca bhikkhave dhamma- 
patirdpakens vaggakammem. flattidutiye oe bbikkh- 
ave kamme pathamam kammevåcam anussAveti, peochå 
flattim thapeti, yåvatikå bhikkhü kammappettå te anigeth 
honti, chandårahånam chando anáhato hoti, saammukhibhütà 
petikkosanti, dhammapatirüpekena vaggakammam. úñstti- 
dutiye co bhikkhave kamme pathamam kammavåcam anusal- 
veti, pacoha üattim thapeti, yAvatikA bhikkbà kammappatth 
te ågatå honti, chandárshánam chando ar&hato hoti, sammu- 
khibhútå patikkosanti, dhammapatiripakens vaggakamman. 
fiattidutiye ce bhikkhave kamme pathamam kammavdcam 
anussåveti, paccha fisttim thapeti, yåvatikå bhikkhü kamms- 
ppattå te ågatå honti, chand@rahdoam chando Absto hoti, 


IX 3. 7-4.1.) MAHÂVAGGA. 319 


sammukhibhütà petikkosanti, dhammapatirûpakena vagga- 
Каттар.  fiatticatutthe ce bhikkhave kamme . , . (the 
same three cases are repeated here) . . . dhammapatirüpakena 
vaggakammam. idam vucosti bhikkhave dhammapatirúpa- 
kena vaggakammam. |17 | katamam ca bhikkhave dhamma- 
patirdpakena samaggakammam. fisttidutiye ce bhi- 
kkhave kamme pathamam kemmavåcam anussåveti, pacchá 
fiattim thapeti, yAvatikA bhikkhü kammappattå te Agata 
honti, ohandårshånam chando åhato hoti, eammukhibhéta na 
patikkosanti, dhammapetirüpakena samaggakammam, fletti- 
eatutthe ce . . . na patikkosanti, dhammepatiripakena sam- 
aggakammam. idam vuccati bhikkhave dhammapatirfi- 
pakena samaggakammam. ||8| katamam са bhikkhave 
dhammenasamaggakemmam. flattidutiyece bhikkhave 
kamme pathemam flattim thapeti, pacchá ekAya kammavåcåya 
kammam karoti, yávatikà bhikkhü kammappatté te Agata 
honti, chandárahánam chando áhato hoti, sammukhibhåtå 
na patikkosanti, dbammena sameggakemmam. — fiatticatutthe 
ce bhikkhave kamme pathamam åattim арен, paoch& tibi 
kammavácáhi kammam karoti, yåvatikå bbikkhQ kamma- 
ppettà te ågatå honti, chsndüárshánam chando &hato hoti, 
sammukhibbütà na  patikkosanti, dhammena samagga- 
kammam. |98 | 


paüca samghá: catuvaggo bhikkhusamgho, paficavaggo 
bhikkbusamgho, dasavaggo bhikkhusamgho, visativaggo 
bhikkhusamgho, etirekavisativeggo bhikkhusamgho. tatra 
bhikkhave yv åyam catuvaggo bhikkhusamgho, tha- 
petvà tini kammåvi upasampadam pevåranam abbhánam 
dhammena samaggo sabbaksmmesu kammappatto. tatra 
bhikkhave yv áyam pafioavaggo bhikkhusamgho, thapetvå 
dve kamméni majjhimesu jenapadesu upasampadam abbhå- 
nam dhammens samaggo sabbakammesn kammappatto. tatra 
bhikkhave yv áyam dassvaggo bhikkhusamgho, tbapetvå 
ekam kammam abbhánam dhammens samaggo sabbekammesu 
kammappatto. tatra bhikkhave yv åyam visativaggo 
bhikkhusamgho, dhammena samaggo sabbakemmesu kamma- 
ppatto. tatra bhikkhave yv åyam atirokavisativaggo 


320 MAHÁVAGGA. (IX.4 1.6. 


bhikkhusamgho, dhammens samaggo sabbakammesu kamma- 
ppatto. [1 catuvaggakaranam ce bhikkhave kammam 
bhikkhunicatattho kammam kareyya, akammam па са 
karantyam. catuvaggakaranam ce bhikkhave kammam 
sikkhamånåsatuttho . . . såmaneracatuttho . . . simanert- 
catuttho . . . sikkham paccakkhátakacatuttho . . . antima- 
vatthum  ajjhápannakacatuttho . . . Apattiyd adassane 
ukkhittakecatuttho . . . åpattiyå appatikamme ukkhitta- 
kacatuttho . . . påpikåya ditthiyé appatinisssgge ukkhitte- 
kacatuttho . . . papdakacatuttho . . . theyyasamveakace- 
tuttho . . . titthiyapakkantakacatattho . . . tiracchünagata- 
catuttho . . . mAtughatakacatuttho . . . pitughAtakacatuttho 
. ++ &rahantaghütakacatuttho . . . bhikkhunidüsakacatuttho 


. samghebhedskacatuttho . . . lohituppådakaeatuttho 

. ubhatovyafijenakacatuttho . . . nánüsamvásakacatuttho 

. nånåsimåya thitacatuttho . . . iddhiy& vebåse thite- 
catuttho . . . yessa samgho kammam keroti tamestuttho 
kammam kereyya, akammam ne ca keraniyam. |2] cetu- 
vaggakarapam. 


paficavaggakaranam ce bbikkhave kammam bhikkhunl- 
райсашо kammam kereyya, akammam na ca karaniyem .. . 
yassa samgho kammam karoti tampaficamo kammam kareyys, 
akammam na са keraniyam. ||3]| paflcavaggakarapsm. 
dasavaggakaranam ce bhikkhave kemmam bhikkhuntda- 
samo kammam kareyya, ekammam na ca karapiyam . .. 
yassa samgho kammam karoti tamdasamo kammam kareyys, 
akammam па са karaniyam. |14] dasavaggakarepam. 
visativaggakaranam ce bhikkhave kammam bhikkhantvis 
kammam kereyye, akammam na oa ksrapiyam . . . yum 
samgho kammam karoti tamviso kammam kareyye, akammam 
па ca karaniyam. |5] visativaggakaranam. 
pårivåsikacatuttho ce bhikkhave parivåsam dedeyya må- 
1йуа patikasseya månsttam dadeyya, tamviso abbheyys, 
akammam па са karapiyam.  mülàya patikassan&rebacs- 
tuttho oe bhikkhave parivAsam dadeyya mül&ya petikasseyys 
mánattam dadeyya, tamviso sbbheyya, akammam па os 
karantyam. månsttårshacatuttho co bhikkhave pariviesm 
dadeyya mülàya patikasseyya månattam dedeyya, tamvis 


IX. 4. 6-9.] MaHÅVAGGA. 321 


abbheyya, akammam па ca karaniyap. månattecåriksca- 
tuttho ce bhikkhave parivåsarn dadeyya målåya patikasseyyo 
månettam dadeyya, tamviso abbheyya, akammam па са 
karaplyam. ebbbånårahecatuttho ce bhikkhave parivdaam 
dadeyya тай!йув petikasseyya månattam dadeyya, tamvieo 
abbheyya, akammam na ca karaniyam. ||6 || 

ekaccassa bhikkhave samghamajjhe patikkossnå rQ- 
hati, екассвава na råheti. kassa ca bhikkhave samghamajjhe 
petikkosan na rüheti bhikkhuniyå bhikkhave samgha- 
majjhe patikkosanà na rühati, sikkhamán&ya bhikkhave 
— la — sAmanorassa bh., såmaneriyå bh., sikkham pacoakkhá- 
takassa bb., antimavatthum ajjhüápannakassa bh., ummatta- 
kassa bh., khittacittassa bh., vedanattassa bh., åpattiyå 
adassane ukkhittakassa bh., Apattiyå appatikamme ukkhitta- 
kassa bh., pápikAya ditthiy& appatinissagge ukkhittskassa 
bh., pandakassa bh., theyyasamvåsakassa bh., titthiyapakkan- 
takassa bh., tiraoohånagatassa bh., matughAtakessa bh., pitu- 
ghåtakassa bh., arahantaghåtakassa bh., bhikkhuntdûsakassa 
bh., samghabhedakassa bh., lohituppådakasss bh., ubhato- 
vyañjanakassa bh., ndndsamvasakassa bh., nán&stmáya thitassa 
bh., iddhiy& vehåse thitassa bh., yassa samgho kammam 
karoli tasa bhikkhave samghamsjjhe petikkosanå na rühati. 
imesam kho bhikkhave samghamsjjhe patikkosanå na rühati. 
171 kassa ca bhikkhave samghamejjhe patikkosanå rühati. 
bhikkhusas bhikkhave pakatattassa samånasamvåsakasan ва- 
méanastmaye thitassa antamaso Ånantarikessåpi bhikkhuno 
vififlápentame samghamejjhe petikkosanå rühati.  imassa 
kho bhikkhave eamghamajjhe patikkosanå rühati. [|8 i| 

dve 'm& bhikkhave nissåranå. atthi bhikkhave puggalo 
appatto nissåranam, tam ce eamgho nissåreti ekaoco sunisså- 
rito ekacco dunnissårito. katamo ca bhikkhave puggalo 
appatto nissfrapam tam ce samgho nissåreti dunnissårito. 
idha pana bhikkbave bhikkhu suddho hoti anåpettiko, tam 
ce samgho nissåreti dunnissárito. ayam vuccati bhikkhave 
puggelo appatto niss&repam tam ce samgho nissåreti dunni- 
ssårito. katamo са bhikkhave puggalo sppatto nissåranam 
tam ce samgho nissåreti sunissårito. idha pana bhikkhave 
bhikkhu bålo hoti avyatto åpattibahulo anapadino gibi- 


FOL. Ш. 21 


399 MAHAVAGGA. (X. & 9-4. 1. 


samsattho viharati ananulomikebi gihisamsaggehi, tam ce 
samgho nissåreti sunissårito. ayam vuccati bhikkhave 
puggalo appatto nissåranam tam ce samgho nissåreti sunisså- 
rito. 1191 

dve "må bhikkhave osåranå. atthi bhikkhave puggalo 
appatto osdranam, tam ce samgho osåreti ekacco sosårito 
ekacco dosårito. katamo ca bhikkbave puggalo appatto 
osåranam tam oe samgho osåreti dosárito. papdako bhikkh- 
ave appatto cefrayam tam ce samgho osåreti dosårito. 
theyyasamvisako bhikkhave . . . titthiyapakkentako bbikkh- 
ave, tiraoobånegsto bh., mátughátako bh., pitughåtako bhb., 
arahentaghåtako bh., bhikkhunidüssko bh., eamghabhedako 
bh., lobituppådako bh., ubhatovyaiijansko bhikkhave appatto 
osåranam tam ce samgho oeåreti dosårito. пуаш vucoati 
bhikkhave puggalo appstto osÅranam tam oe samgho osåreti 
dosårito. ime vuocanti bhikkhave puggalå appettá osåranam 
tam ce samgho osåreti dosåritå. | l0|| katamo ca bhikkhave 
puggalo appatto osåranam tam ce samgho osåreti sosårito. 
hatthaochinno bhikkhave appatto osårupnam tam ce mmgho 
osåreti sosårito. pådaochinno bhikkhave, hatthapådaoshinno 
bh., kapnaechinno bh., рёвассћіппо bh., kapnanáüsacchinno 
bh., aiigulicchinno bh., alacchinno bh., kapdaracohinno bh., 
phanahatthako bh., khujjo bh., våmavo bh., galagandi bh., 
lakkhaņåhato bh., kasåhato bh., likhitako bh., sipadiko bh., 
páparogi bh., parisadûsako bh., káno bh., kuni bh., khañjo 
bh., pakkhahato bh., obinniriyåpatbo bh., jarádubbalo bb., 
andho bh., mûgo bh., badhiro bh., andhamûgo bh., andha- 
badhiro bh., mügebedhiro bh., andhamfigabadhiro bhikkhave 
eppatto osårapam tam oe samgho osåreti sosårito. ayam 
vuocati bhikkhave puggalo appatto os&rsnam tam ое samgho 
osåreti sosårito. ime vuccanti bhikkhave puggalå appettå 
osårapam tam ce samgho osåreti sosåritå. j| 1114] 

Våsobhagåmabhånevåraem pathamam. 


idha pane bhikkhave bhikkhussa na hoti Apatti detthabbå 
tam enam oodeti eamgho vå sambahulå và ekspuggalo và: 
&pattim tvam Avuso ёрапоо, passas’ etam åpattin ti. so evam 
vedeti: n’ atthi me åvuso Apatti yam aham paseyyan ti 


IX. 6. 1-5.) MAHÅVAGGA. 323 


tam samgho åpattiyå adassane ukkhipati, adhammakammam. 
idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhussa na hoti Apatti patikåtabbå. 
tam enam codeti samgho vå sambahulå vå ekapuggalo va: 
Apsttim tvam åvuso dpanno, patikarohi tam Apattin ti. во 
evam vadeti: n’ atthi me åvuso åpetti yam sham patika- 
reyyan ti. tam samgho åpattiyå appatikamme ukkhipati, 
eadhammekammam. idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhusss na 
hoti påpikå ditthi patinisesjjetå. tam enam codeti samgho 
vå sambahulá và ekapuggalo và: påpikå te &vuso ditthi, 
patinissajj' etam påpikam ditthin ti. so evam vadeti: n' atthi 
me Åvuso påpikå ditthi yam aham patinissajjeyyan ti tam 
samgho раріКАуа ditthiyA appatiniesagge ukkhipati, adha- 
mmakammam. ||1 || idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhusea na hoti 
Apatti datthabbé na hoti &patti petikåtabbå. tam enam codeti 
samgho vå sambahulå và ekapuggalo và: Apattim (тата Åvuso 
Apanno, passas’ etam Apattim, patikarohi tam Apattin ti. во 
evam vadeti: n' attbi me Avuso åpatti yam aham passeyyam, 
n’ atthi me åvuso Apatti yam ahem petikareyyan ti. tam 
eamgho adassane vå appetikamme vå ukkhipati, adhamma- 
kammam. |211 idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhnesa na hoti 
åpatti datthabbå na hoti påpikå ditthi patinissajjetà. tam 
enam oodeti samgho vå sambahulå vå ekapuggalo và: 
Apattim уат åvuso ápanno, passas’ etam Apattim, påpikå 
te ditthi, patiniassjj’ etam p&pikam ditthin ti. во evam 
vade : n’ atthi me Avuso Apatti yam aham passeyyam, 
n’ atthi me påpikå ditthi yam aham patinissajjeyyan tL tam 
samgho adassane và eppatiniessgge vå ukkhipati, adhamme- 
kammam. ||JJi| idha pana bhikkhave bbikkhusss na hoti 
Gpatti patikétabbé ne hoti påpikå ditthi patiniesajjeta. tam 
enam codeti samgho vå sambahulå vå ekapuggalo và: Apattim 
tvam åvuso åpanno, pstikaroh' etam Apattim, påpikå te ditthi, 
petinimajj etam pépikam dittbin ti. 30 етар vadeti: n’ 
atthi me Avuso Apatti yam sham patikareyyam, n’ айы me 
påpikå ditthi yam aham petinissajjeyyan ti. tam eamgho 
appetikamme vá appetinissagge vá ukkhipeti, adhamma- 
kammam. ||| idha pene bhikkhave bhikkbussa na hoti 
üpatti dattbebbå na hoti &patti patikåtsbbå na hoti påpikå 
ditthi patinissajjetA. tam enam codeti eamgho vå sambahulå 


324 MAHÁVAOGA. (LX. 5. 6-8. 


và ekapuggalo và: &ápattim ёта åvuso ápanno, passas’ etam 
åpattim, patikarohi tam åpattim, påpikå te ditthi, patinissajj" 
etam püpikam ditthin ti. во evam vadeti: n’ atthi me 
åvuso üpatti yam aham passeyyam, n' atthi me åvnso åpatti 
yam abam  patikareyyam, n’ atthi me påpikå ditthi 
yam sham patinissajjeyyan ti. tam samgho sdassane và 
appatikamme үй appatinissagge vA ukkhipati, adhamma- 
катта. || 5 1 

idbs pana bhikkhave bhikkhussa hoti Apatti dattbabbå 
tam enam codeti samgho và sambahulà vå ekapuggalo và: 
Apattim tvam ётиво Åpanno, passas’ etam Apattin ti. во 
evem vadeti: åmåvuso passimiti. tam samgho Åpattiyå 
adassane ukkhipati, adhammakammam. idha pana bhikkh- 
ave bbikkhussa hoti Apatti patikåtabbå. tam enam codeti 
samgho và sambahulå vi ekapuggalo và: åpettim tvam 
åvuso Apanno, patikarohi tam Apattin ti so evam vadeti: 
&mávuso patikarissåmiti. tam samgho åpattiyå appatikamme 
ukkhipati, adhammskammam. idha pana bhikkhave bhikkh- 
ussa hoti pápik& ditthi petinissajjetà. tam enam oodeti 
samgho vå sambahulå và ekapnggalo vá: påpikå te &vuso 
ditthi, patinissajj' etam p&pikam ditthin ti. во evam vadeti: 
&mávuso patinissajjissámiti. tam samgho påpikåye ditthiyá 
appatinissagge ukkhipati, adhammakammam. j||6|  idba 
pana bhikkhave bhikkhusss hoti ёраб datthabbå hoti ёра 
patikåtabbå — la — hoti Apatti datthabbå hoti påpikå dittbi 
patinissajjet4, hoti åpatti patik&tabbá hoti pépikA ditthi 
petinisssjjetà, hoti åpatti detthebb& hoti арай patikåtabbå 
hoti påpikå ditthi patinissajjetá. tam enam codeti samgho 
và sambahulé vá ekspuggalo va: ápattim tvam åvuso Apanno, 
passas’ etam Apattim, patikarohi tam Apattim, раріКА te 
ditthi, patiniasajj’ etam påpikam ditthin ti. so evam vadeti: 
&mávuso passåmi, ёше patikarissåmi, âma patinisssjjissh miti. 
tam samgho adassane vå eppatikamme vå appatinissagge vå 
ukkhipati, adhemmakammam. [|7 | 

idha рапа bhikkhave bhikkhussa hoti åpatti datthabbå. 
tam enam codeti samgho vA sambahulà vå ekapuggalo vá: 
Apattim tvam &vuso ápanno, passas’ etam üpatün ti. во evam 
vadeti: n’ atthi me åvuso ápatti yam aham passeyyan ti. 


IX. 6. 8-8 2.] MABAVAGGA. 325 


tam samgho adassane ukkhipeti, dhammakammam. idha 
pana bhikkhave bbikkhusss hoti &petti patikåtabbå. tam 
enam codeti eamgho vå sambahulå và ekapuggalo vå: åpattim 
{тата fvuso épanno, pstiksrohi tam Apattin ti. во evam 
vadeti: n’ atthi me åvuso ápatti yam sham patikareyyan ti.s 
tam samgho appatikamme ukkhipati, dhammakammam. idha 
pana bhikkhave bhikkhussa hoti påpikå ditthi patinisssjjetå. 
tam enam codeti samgho vå sambahulé va ekapuggalo và: 
påpikå te &vuso ditthi, patinisaajj’ etam påpikem ditthin ti. 
во evam vadeti: n' atthi me Avuso påpikå ditthi yam ahany- 
patinisssjjeyyan ti. tam samgho pápikáya ditthiyå appa- 
finissagge ukkhipsti, dbammakemmam. |81 idha pana 
bhikkhave bhikkhussa hoti ápetti datthabbA hoti ápatti 
patikåtabbå, hoti Apatti dattbabbå hoti påpikå ditthi pati- 
nissajjeta, hoti &patti patikåtebbå hoti påpikå ditthi pati-'- 
nissajjetå, hoti Apatti datthabbå hoti &patti patikatabb& hoti 
påpikå ditthi patinissajjetà. tam enam codeti samgho vA 
eambehulA và ekepuggalo vå: åpettim {таш &vuso åpauno, 
passas’ etam Apattim, petikerohi tam Apattim, påpikå te 
ditthi, patinieaajj’ etam p&pikam ditthin ti. во evam vadeti : z 
n’ atthi me Avuso üpatti yam abam passeyyam, п” atthi me 
&vuso åpatti yam aham patikareyyam, n’ atthi me påpikå 
ditthi yam ahem patinissajjeyyan ti. tam samgho adassane 
và appatikamme vå appatinissagge vå ukkhipati, dhamma- 
kamman ti. 19181] : 


atha kho &yasmá Upåli yena bhagava ten’ upesamkami, 
upssamkamitvà bhagavantam abhivådetyå ekamantam nieidi. 
ekamantam nisinno kho &yasmá Upåli bhagavantam etad 
avoca: yo nu kho bhante ssmeggo samgho samumukhükars- 
ntyam kammam asammukhé karoti, dhammakammam nu kho 
tam bhante vinayakemman ti. adhemmakammam tam Upåli 
avinayakemmam. |11 yo nu kho bhante samaggo eamgho 
patipucchåkaraniyam kammam appatipuechà karoti, patififia- 
yeskareniyam kammam appatiññáya karoti, sativinayårshassa 
amü]heavinayam deti, amü|havingyárahasea tassapåpiyyasikå- 
kammam karoti, tassapápiyyasikákammár&hassa tajjaniya- 
ksmmam karoti, tajjaniyakammárahassa nissayakammam k., 


396 MAHÅVAGGA. (LX. 6. 2-5. 


nisssyakammárahassa pabbajaniyakammam k., pabbéjaniya- 
kammárahassa patisdraniyakammam k., patisàrapiyakammá- 
rahassa ukkhepaniyakemmam k., ukkbepaniyakammårahassa 
parivåsam deti, parivasiraham mûlåya patikassati, mÖlåye 
patikassanårehasse mánattam deti, mAnattdraham abbheti, 
abbhånåraham upasampådeti, dhammakammam nu kho tam 
bhante vinayakamman ti. 2| adhammakammam tam Upåli 
avinayakammam. yo kho Upåli samaggo samgho sammu- 
kbåkaraniyam kammam asammukha karoti, evam kho Upáli 
adhammakammam hoti avinayakammam evañ ca pans 
samgho eftisiro hoti. yo kho Upåli samaggo samgho peti- 
pucchåkaraniyam kammam appatipucchá karoti, patiññáya- 
karanlyam . . . abbbånåraham upasampédeti, evam kho 
Upåli adhammakammam hoti avinayakammam evañ ca рапа 
samgho såtisåro hottti. |1311 | 

yo nu kho bhante samaggo samgho sammukhåkarantyam 
kammam sammukbå keroti, dhammakammam nu kho tam 
bhante vinayakamman ti. dhammekammam tam Upåli 
vinayakammam. yo nu kho bhante samaggo samgho pati- 
pucobåkaraniyam kemmam  petipucchá karoti, patififiaya- 
keraniyam kammam  patilüAya karoti, sativinayårahesse 
sativinayam deti . . . abbbánáreham abbheti, upasampadá- 
raham upasampádeti, dbammakammam nu kho tam bhante 
vinayakamman ti. dhammekammam tam Upåli vinaya- 
kammam. yo kho Upåli samaggo samgho sommukbákarea- 
niyam kammam sammukhá karoti, evam kho Upáli dhamma- 
kammam hoti vinayakammam evañ ca pana samgho anati- 
såro hoti. уо kho UpAli samaggo samgho patipuochåkeraniyem 
катташ patipucchá karoti . . . upasampadáreham upasam- 
pádeti, evam kho Upåli dbammakammam hoti vinayakammam 
evañ ca pana samgho anatisáro hotiti. || 4 [| 

yo nu kho bhante ssmaggo samgho sativinayårahasss 
amü]bavinayam deti smü]hevinayürahassa sativinayam deti, 
dhammekammam uu kho tam bhante vinayekamman ti. 
adhammakammam tam Upåli avinayakammam. уо nu kho 
bhante samaggo samgho amå]havinayårshassa tassapåpiyye- 
eikåkemmam karoti tassapåpiyyasikåkammårehassa amü]ha- 
vinayam deti, tassapåpiyyasikåkammårshasss  tajjaniyu- 


IX. €. 5-8.) MAHÅVAGGA. 327 


kammam karoti tsjjeniyskammårahesss tassapåpiyyasikå- 
kammam karoti, tajjaniyakammArahassa nissayakammam 
karoti nissayskammárahassa tajjaniyakammam karoti, nissa- 
yakammårahassa pabbájaniyakammam karoti pabbájaniya- 
kammårahassa nisssyekammam karoti, pabbåjaniyakammå- 
rahassa patisáraniyakemmam karoti patishrapiyakammára- 
hassa pabbåjaniyakammam karoti, patisrapiyakemmárahaasa 
ukkhepaniyakammam karoti ukkhepaniyakammårahassa pati- 
sfraniyakammam karoti, ukkhepaniyakammárabassa pari- 
våsam deti parivåsårahassa ukkhepaniyakammam karoti, 
parivåsåraham máül&ye pațikasasti müláya petiksssanårabesse 
parivåsam deti, mûlâya patikassandrahassa mánattam deti 
mànattáraham mülàys petikassati, månattâraham sbbheti 
abbhånårahassa mAnattam deti, abbbånåraham apasampédeti 
upassmpadårahar abbheti, dhammakammam nu kho tam 
bhante vinayakamman ti. ||5|| adhammakammam tam Upåli 
avinayskammarp. yo kho Upåli samaggo mpgho sativinayå- 
rahasss emü|havinsyam deti amü|havinayárebassa sativine- 
yam deti, evap kho Upåli adhammakammam hoti avinsye- 
kammam evañ ca pans samgho såtisåro hoti. yo kho Upåli 
eamaggo samgho amü]havinayüárahesesa tassapåpiyyasikå- 
kammam karoti .. . upesampedàraham abbheti, evam kho 
Upåli sdhammaksmmam hoti avinayakammam evañ ca pana 
eamgho såtisåro hotiti, [6 |! 

yo nu kho bhente samaggo eamgho ‘sativinsyArahasss 
sativinayam deti  emü]|hsvinayüárehaswa — amü]hevinayam 
deti, dhammakammam nu kho tam bhante vinayakamman 
ti dhammakammam tam Upåli vinayakammam. yo nu 
kho bhante samsggo samgho amújhavinayárahassa amíü- 
lhavinsyam deti, tassap&piyyasikákemmáraebassa taseepå- 
piyyesikáükammam karoti . . . abbbånårabam abbheti, 


tam bhante vinsyakamman ti. |j7| dbammaksmmam tam 
Upåli aa уо kho Upåli samaggo samgho 
sativinayårahassa sativinayam deti smålhavinayårabassa 
amåj]havinsyam deti, evam kho Upåli dhammekammam hoti 
vinayakammam етей ca pana samgho anstisåro hoti. yo kho 
Upåli samaggo samgho amü]havinayürahassa amü|havinayam 


928 MAHÅVAGGA. [X & 8-7. 1. 


deti . . . upasampedåraham upesampådeti, evam kho Upåli 
dbammakammam hoti vinsyakammam evañ ca pana samgho 
anatisåro hotiti. i8 || 

atha kho bhagavå bhikkhQ &mantesi: yo kho bhikkhave 
samaggo samgho sativinayérahesss amü]havinayam deti, evam 
kho bhikkhave adhammaksmmam hoti avinayakammam evañ 
са репа samgho såtisåro hoti. yo kho bhikkhave asmaggo 
eamgho sativinayürshassa tassapåpiyyasikåkemmam karoti, 
eativinayårahasea tajjaniyakammam karoti . . . sativinay&- 
таһаш upssampådeti, evam kho bbikkhave adbammakammam 
hoti avinayakammam evafi ca pana samgho såtisåro hoti. 
yo kho bhikkhave samaggo samgho amúlhavinayárahasas 
tassapåpiyyasikâkammam karoti, evam kho bhikkhave adha- 
mmakammam hoti avinayakammam етай ca pana samgho 
såtisåro hoti, yo kho bhikkhave samaggo samgho amålha- 
vinayårahassa tajjaniyakammam karoti . . . amü]havinay&- 
raham upasampádeti, amü]havinayürahessa sativinayam deti, 
evam kho bbikkhave adhammakemmam hoti avinayakammam 
етей ca pana samgho eåtisåro hoti. yo kho bhikkhave 
samaggo samgho tassapåpiyyasikåkemmårshasse . . . upa- 
sampediraham abbheti, evam kho bhikkhave edhamma- 
kammam hoti avinayakammem evañ ca pana samgho såtisåro 
hotiti. 1911611 

Upålipucohåbbånavåram dutiyam. 


idha pana bbikkhave bbikkhu bhandanakåreko hoti 
kalahakårako vivådakårako bhassakáreko samghe adhikara- 
nakàrako. tatra ce bhikkhünam evam hoti: ayam kho 
&vuso bhikkhu bhandanakdrako — la — samghe adhikara- 
mekársko, hend’ assa mayam tajjaniyakammam keromå "ti, 
te tassa tajjaniyakammam keronti adhammena vaggá. во 
tambå àvàsà allem Avdsam gacchati, tatths bhikkhünam 
evam hoti: ayam kho åvuso bhikkhu samghena tajjaniya- 
kammam keto adhammena vaggehi, hand’ assa mayam 
tajjaniyakammam keromå "ti, te tamsa tajjaniyakammam 
karonti adhammena samaggå so (ambåpi åvåså aññam 
åvåsam gacchati, tattha pi bbikkhünem . . . tajjaniya- 
kammam kato adhammena samsggehi, hand’ essa mayam 


IX. 7. 1-5.) MAHAVAGGA. 320 


tajjaniyakammam karomå 'ti, te tassa tajjaniyakammam 
karonti dhammena vagg& so tambépi åvåså efifiam.. . 
tajjaniyakammam kato dhemmens vaggehi, hand’ assa 
mayam tajjaniyakammam karomå 'ti, te tassa tajjaniya- 
kammam karonti dbammapetirüpakena vaggå. so tamhåpi 
åvåsd aññam . . . tajjaniyakammam kato dhammapatir(- 
pakens vaggehi, hand’ assa mayam tajjaniyakammam karomå 
"ti, te tassa tajjaniyakammam karonti dhammapetirüpakena 
samaggå. [11 idha pena bhikkhave bhikkhu bhandanakå- 
тако hoti . . . samghe adhikeranakfrako. tatra oe bhikkhü- 
nam evam hoti: ayam kho åvuso bhikkhu bbandanakárako 
. . + samgbe adhikaranakårako, hand’ assa тауар tajjani- 
yakammam karomå 'ti, te tassa tajjaniyakemmam keronti 
&dhemmena samaggå. во tamhå åvåså efiflam Avåsam 
gacchati, tattha bhikkhünam evam hoti: ayam kho Avuso 
bhikkhu samgbens tajjaniyakammam kato adhammens 
eamaggehi, hand’ assa mayam . . . dhammene veggá. so 
tambåpi åvåså . . . dhammapetirüpakens vaggá. во tamhåpi 
åvåst . . . dhammepetirtipskens samaggå. во tamhåpi 
dvds . . . adhammena vaggå. |2] idha pene bhikkhave 
bhikkhu bhandanakárako hoti . . . samghe sdbiksranakå- 
rako. tatra ce bhikkhünam evam hoti: ayam kho &vuso 
bhikkhu bhandanakáreko . . . samghe edbikeranakirako, 
hand’ assa mayam tajjaniyakammam karomå "ti, te tassa tajja- 
niyaksmmam karonti dhammens vaggå . . . dhammapatir(- 
pakena vaggå . . . dhammepatirüpakena eamaggá . . . adha- 
mmena vaggå . . . adhammena samaggå. 1131 idha pana 
bhikkhave bhikkhu bhapdanekérako hoti . . . samghe 
adhikaranakårako. tatra ce bhikkhünam evam hoti: ayam 
"kho åvuso bhikkhu bbandenakårako . . . samghe adhikaranaké- 
rako, hand’ assa mayam tajjaniyakammam karomá "ti, te tassa 
tajjaniyakammam karonti dbammepetirüpakena vaggå ... 
dhemmapetirüpakena samaggå . . . adhammena vaggå ... 
adhammena samaggå . . . dhammena vaggå. ||4|| idba pana 
bhikkhave bhikkhu bhandsnakárako hoti . . . samghe adhi- 
karanskfrako. tatra ce bhikkhünam evam hoti: ayam kho 
&vuso bhikkhu bbandanskårako . . . ватрће adhikaranskå- 
rako, hand’ assa mayam tajjaniyakammam karomå "ti, te 


330 MAHÅVAGGA. (IX. 7. 5-10. 


tassa tajjaniyakammam Кагопіі dhammapatirüpakens sam- 
едва . . . adhammens vaggå . . . adhammena samsggå 

. . dhammena vaggå . . . dhammapatirüpakena vaggå. |J5 || 

idha pane bhikkhave bhikkhu bålo hoti avyatto dpattiba- 
hulo anapedáno gihisamsattho viharati ananulomikehi 
gihisapsaggehi tatra ce bhikkhünam evam hoti: ayam 
kho ávuso bhikkhu bilo avyatto . . . gihisaranaggebi, 
hand’ assa mayam nissayakammam karomå ‘ti, te tasa 
nissayakammam  karonti edhammena vaggå. во tambå 
åvåsk aññam åvåsam gaochati, tattha bhikkhünam evam 
hoti; ayam kho åvuso bhikkhu samghena nismayakammam 
kato adhammena vaggehi, hand’ азаа mayam nissayakammam 
karomå "ti, te tasaa nisssyakammam karonti adhammene 
samsggå —la— dhammena vaggå, dhammapatirüpakena 
vaggå, dhammapatiripakena samaggü. ува hetthá tathá 
cakkam kåtabbam —la—. 161 idha pana bhikkhave 
bhikkhu kulsdQsako hoti pápasamácáro. tatra се bhikkhü- 
nam evam hoti: ayam kho &vuso bhikkhu kuladüsako 
påpasamåcåro, band’ assa mayam  pabbájeniyakammam 
karomå ‘ti te tassa pabb&janiyakammam karonti adhammena 
vaggå . . . (comp. Š 6) . . . dhammspatirüpekena samaggá. 
cakkam kStabbam. 171 idba pena bhikkhsve bhikkhu 
giht akkosati paribbåssti. tatra oe bhikkhünam evam hoti: 
ayam kho åvuso bhikkhu gihi akkosati paribhåssti, hand’ assa 
mayam patisáraniyakammam karomå ”ti, te tasaa patisåraniya- 
kammam karonti adhammena vaggå . . . (сотр. $ 6)... 
dhammapetirüpakena eamsggá. cakkam kåtabbam. |8] idha 
рапа bhikkhave bhikkhu Apattim ápajjitvá na iochati ápattim 
pessitum. tatra ce bhikkhünam evam hoti: ayam kho 
Avuso bhikkhu &pattim åpsjjitvå na icchati Apattim passitum, 
hand’ assa mayam ápettiyá adassane ukkhepaniyskammam 
karomå 'ti, te tama åpattiyå adassane ukkhepaniyakammam 
karonti adhammens veggå . . . dhammapatirfipakena sam- 
agg’.  cakkam kåtsbbam. |91 idha pana bhikkhave 
bbikkhu Apattim åpejjitvå na icchati Apattim petikátum. 
tatra ce bhikkhünam evam hoti: ayam kho åvuso bhikkhu 
&pattim åpejjitvå ne icchati üpettim patikåtum, hand’ assa 
mayam ápattiy& appatikamme ukkhepaniyakammam karomå 


1Х. 7. 10-14.] MABÅVAGGA. 331 


"і, te tassa åpattiyå appatikamme ukkhepsniyakammam 
karonti adhammena vaggå . . . dhemmapetirüpakena sam- ` 
aggå. cakkam katabbam. |1101 idha pane bhikkhave bhikkhu 
na icchati påpikam ditthim petiniseajjitum. tatra ce bhi- 
kkhånam evam hoti: ayam kho åvuso bhikkhu na icchati 
påpikam ditthim patinissajjitum, hend’ assa mayam påpikåye 
ditthiya appatinissagge ukkhepaniyakammam karomå "ti, 
te tama püpik&ya ditthiy& appatinissagge ukkhepaniya- 
kammam karonti sdhammena vaggá . . . dhammapatirü- 
pakena samaggå. cakkam kátabbam. ||11 |} 
idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu samghens tajjaniyakammam 
kato sammávattati lomam påteti nettbåram vattati tajjani- 
yassa kammassa patippassaddhim yåcati. tatra ce bhikkhü- 
nam evam hoti : ayam kho åvuso bhikkhu samghena tajjani- 
yakammam kato sammåvattati . . . patippassaddhim уёсаб, 
hand’ assa mayem tajjaniyakammam petippassambhemé "6, 
te tass tajjeniypskemmam pstippassambhenti adhammena 
vaggå. во tamhå åvåså afiflam åvåsam gacchati, tattha 
bhikkhíünam evam hoti: imassa kho Avuso bhikkhuno 
samgbens tajjaniyakammam patippassaddham adhammena 
vaggebi, hand’ assa mayam tajjaniyakammam patippassam- 
bhemå 'ti. te tassa tajjaniyakammam patippessambhenti 
adhammeng samaggå . . . dhammena vaggå . . . dhamma- 
petirüpakena vaggá . . . dhammapatirdpakene samaggá. |! | 2 || 
idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu samghena tajjaniyakammam 
kato sammåvattati lomam påteti nettháram vattati tajjani- 
yassa kammassa patippasssddhim yåcati. tatra ce bhikkhü- 
nam evam hoti: ayam kho åvuso bhikkhu . . . y&cati, hand’ 
assa mayam tejjeniyakammam patippassambhemá "ti, te tassa 
tajjaniyakammam petippassambhenti adhsmmene samaggå 
++ > (comp. § 2-5) . . . dhammepatirüpakene veggá. |11311 
idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu samghena nisssyakemmam 
kato sammávattati lomam påteti netthåram vattati nissayassa 
kammaæa patippassaddhim yåceti . . . (comp. Ñ 12-13) 
. idha pene bhikkhave bhikkhu samghena pabbájani- 
yakammam kato . . . patisAraniyakammam kato . . . ápatti- 
yå adassane ukkhepaniyakammam kato . . . åpattiyå appati- 
kamme ukkhepaniyakammem kato . . . pàpikáys ditthiyå 


IX. 7. 18-20.] MAHAVAGGA. 333 


yekammam karomå ”ti . . . ime pafica vårå samkhittå 
idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu Apattim Apajjitvé na icchati 
Apattim passitum. tatra ce . . . Apattiyd adassane ukkhe- 
peniyskemmam keromá "ti . . . ime pafica уйга samkhitté, 
idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu Apattim åpsjjitvå na icchati 
Apattim patikátum. tatra ce . . . åpattiyå appatikamme 
ukkhepaniyskammam karomá "ti . . . ime pafica vårå 
samkhittá idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu na ioohsti på- 
pikem dittbim patinisssjjitum. tatra ce . . . påpikåye 
dittbiyå appatinissagge ukkhepaniyakammam karomå "ti. 
ime рейса vara samkhittå. || 18] 

idhe pana bhikkhave bhikkhu samghena tajjeniyakammam 
kato sammåvsttati lomam páteti nettbåram vattati tajjaniyassa 
kammuasss petippessaddhim yåceti. tatra ce bhikkhünam 
evam hoti: ayam kho åvuso bhikkhu samghena tajjaniya- 
kammam kato sammåvattati . . . patippassaddhim yåcati, 
hand’ assa mayam tajjaniyakemmam patippsssambhemá "ti, 
te tassa tajjaniyakammam patippassambhenti adhammena 
vaggá. tatrattho samgho vivadati . . . ime tattha bbikkht 
dhammevüdino. idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu samghena 
tajjaniyakammam kato sammåvattati . . . te tassa ук 
kammam petippassambhenti adhammens samaggå . 
dhammens vaggá . - dhammepetirüpakena vaggå . 
dhammapatirüpakena. mmaggå . . ime tattha bhikkbå 
dhammavüdino. ||19|| idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu sam- 
ghena nissayakammam kato . . . pabbAjaniyakammam kato 
- » . påtisåraniyaksmmam kato . . . åpsttiyå adassane 
ukkhepaniyakammam kato . . . åpattiyå appatikamme 
ukkhepaniyakammam Каш... påpikåye ditthiyå appati- 
nissagge ukkhepaniyakammam kato . . . ime tattha bhikkht 
dhammavådino ”ti. 12017 || 

Campeyyekkhandhekem nevamam. 


imamhi khandhake vatthüni chattimsåniti. tassa uddånam: 
Campåyam bhagavå âsi, vatthu Våsabhagåmake, 
Agantukánam ussukkam akási icohitabbake,) 
pakatafifiuno "ti flatvå ussukkam па kari (айд, 
ukkhitto na karotiti agamå jinasantike.| 


334 MAHÄVAGGA. 


adhammena vaggakammam samaggam adhammena ca 
dhammens vaggakammam ca patirüpakena vaggikam | 
patirüpakena samaggam, eko ukkhipat’ ekakam 
eko ca dve sambahule samgham ukkhipat’ ekato,| 
duve pi, sambahulapi, samgho samgham ca ukkhipi. 
5 sabbefific pavaro sutvå adhamman ti patikkhipi.| 
flattivipannam yam kammam sampannam anussáva- 
nam 

anussávanavipannam sampannam ñattiyå ca yam | 
ubhayena vipannam ca afifiatredhammam eva ca 
vind satthu patikuttham kuppam atthánársbikam.| 
adhamma-vaggam samaggam patirüpáni ye duve, 
dhammen’ eva os såmaggim anuflidai tathågato.) 
catuvaggo paficavaggo dasavaggo ca visati 
parovisativaggo oa eamgho paficavidho tathé.| 
thapetvá upesampadam yam са kammam pavåranam 

10 abbhánakammena saha catuvaggehi kammiko.| 
duve kamme thapetvåns majjhadesupasampadá 
abbhdnam paficavaggiko sabbakammesu kammiko.| 
abbhan’ ekam thapetvåne ye bhikkhü dasavaggikå. 
sabbakammakaro samgho viso sabbatthakammiko.| 
bhikkhuni sikkhemånå ca såmsnero såmanerikå 
paccakkhét’-antimavatthum ukkhitt’ åpattådassane | 
appatikamme ditthiyå pandaks-theyyasamvåsakam 
titthiya-tiracchénagatam måtu pitu ca ghåtakar | 
arsham bhikkhunidüsim bhedakam lohituppådam vyañja- 

nam 

15 nånåsamvåsako с’ eva nånåstmåya iddhiyå | 
yassa samgho kare kammam hont’ ete catuvisati, 
sambuddhena pstikkhittå na h’ ete ganapüraká.| 
pårivåsikscatuttho parivåsam dadeyya vå 
míül&-mánattam abbheyya akammam na са karanam.| 
m(lá-araha-mánattà abbbånåraham eva са 
na kammakårakå paños sambuddhens pakåsitå.| 
bhikkhunt sikkhamáná ca såmanero såmanerikå 
paccakkh'-antima-ummattà khitta-vedan'-adassane | 
appatikamme ditthiyå pandakåpi са vyafijand 

20 nånåesmvåsakå simå vehåsam yassa kamma са | 


MAHÄVAGGA. 


attbårasannam etesam ра{1 кова na rühati, 
bhikkhussa pakatattassa rühati petikkosanå./ 
suddh' asså dunnisårito, bálo hi sunissårito. 
pandako theyyasamvåsam pakkanto tiracchånagato | 
mátu pito erahanta-düsako samghabhedako 
lohitappádako o' eva ubhatovyafijano ca уо | 
ekådasannam etesam osåranam. na yujjati. 
hattha-pådå tadubhayam kappa-násá tadubhayá | 
anguli aja-kandaram phanam khujjo ca våmano 

25 gandi lakkhans-kaså ca likhitako ca eipadi | 
pápe-perisa-káno ca kuni khañjo hato pi ca 
iriy4patha-dubbalo andho mügo ca badhiro | 
andham figa-badhiro ca migabadhiram eva ca 
andhabedhiramügo ca dvattims' ete anûnakå,| 
tesam osåranam hoti sambuddhens pakåsitam. 
datthabbé patikåtabbå nissajjetam na vijjati,| 
tama ukkhepanå kammå satta honti adhammikå, 
4pannam snuvattantam eatta te pi adhammikt,| 
åpannam nánuvattantam sattakemmesu dhammika, 

30 ssmmukhå patipucohá ca patififidya ca kårakå | 
sati-amü]ha-pápikA tajjaniyavasena ca 
pabbåjaniya-patisåro ukkhepa-perivása ca | 
müla-mánatta-abbhünà tath’ eva upasampadá : 
afifiam kareyya afifiassa solas’ ote adhammikå,| 
tam tam kareyys tam tassa sojas' ete sudhammiká, 
рессёгореуув аййаййо solas’ ete adhammika,| 
dvedvetamülakan tassa, te pi solasa dhammiká, 
ekekamflakam cakkam adhemman ti jino ’bravi.| 
akåsi tajjaniyakammam samgho bhandanakårako 

35 adhammens vaggakammam, afifiem vasa gacchi во, | 
tattha dhammena samaggå (алза tajjaniyam karum, 
afifiattha vaggadhammena tassa tajjaniyam karum,| 
petirOpakena vaggåpi samaggåpi tathå karum. 
adhammena samaggå ca, dhammens vaggam eva ca,| 
patirüpakena vaggå ca, samaggå ca, ime padá, 
ekekamülakam katvå сакка bandhe vicakkhano.| 
bálüvyattasea nissayam, pabbåje kuladüsakam, 
pstiséraniyakammam kare akkosakasas ca,| 


335 


336 MAHÅVAGGA. 


adassanåpatikamme yo ca ditthim na nissaje 

40 tesam ukkhepaniyakammam satthavåhena bhásitam.| 
ukkhepaniyakammånam раййо tajjaniyam naye. 
tesam yeva snulomarn sammåvattantayåcite | 
passaddbi tesam kammånam hetthakammansyena ca. 
tasmim-tasmim ta kammesu tatrattho ca vivadati | 
akatam dukkatam о’ eva pune kåtabbakan ti ca 
kamme paseaddhiyà cåpi te bhikkhf dhammavådino.| 
vipattivyådhite disvå kammappatte mahåmuni 
patippassaddhim akkhåsi sallakatto va osadhan ti. 


337 


MAHAVAGGA. 
x 


Tena вашвуепа buddho bhagsvå Kosambiyam viharati 
Ghositåråme. tena kho pana samayena aflflataro bhikkha 
&pattim Apanno hoti, so tasså Apattiyå Apattiditthi hoti, afifie 
bhikkhü tasså ApattiyA an&pattiditthino honti, so aparena 
samayens tas ApattiyA anfpattiditthi hoti, aññe bhikkhå 
tasså åpattiyå Apattiditthino honti. aths kho te bhikkhü tam 
bhikkhum etad avocum: Apattim іта Avuso Apanno, passas’ 
etam åpattin ti. n' atthi me åvuso åpatti yam aham passeyyan 
ti atha kho te bhikkhü sAmaggim labhitvà tam bhikkhum 
Apettiy& adassane ukkhipimeu. 111 во са bhikkhu bahnesuto 
hoti ågatågamo dhammadharo vinayadharo mátik&dharo 
pandito vyatto medhávi lajjt kukkuccako sikkbåkåmo. atha 
kho so bhikkhu sanditthe sambhatte bhikkhü upesamkamitvá 
etad avoca: andpstti евА åvuso n’ eså Apatti, anápenno "mhi 
n’ ambi Åpanno, anukkhitto "mhi n’ amhi ukkhitto, adha- 
mmiken' amhi kammena ukkhitto kuppena atthán&rahene, 
hotha me åyasmanto dhammato vinayato pakkbå "ti 
&labhi kho so bhikkhu sanditthe sambhatte bhikkhü 
pakkhe. jånspedånam рі sanditthinam sambhattånam bhi- 
kkhúnam santike dütam p&hesi: anApatti esá åvnso . . . atthå- 
nårahene, hontu me åyasmanto dhammato vinayato pakkhå 
‘ti. alsbhi kho so bhikkhu j&napade рі sanditthe sambhatte 
bhikkhü pakkhe 121 аһа kho te ukkhittánuvattakA 
bhikkhü yena ukkhepak& bhikkhü ten’ upasamkamimeu, 
opesamkamitvá ukkhepake bhikkhü etad avocum : anåpatti 
өвд “Avuso n’ eå Apatti, an&panno eso bhikkhu n’ eso 
bhikkhu ёраппо, anukkhitto eso bhikkhu n’ eso bhikkhu 


voL. m, 22 


338 MAHÁVAGGA. (X. 1. 3-6. 


ukkhitto, edhammikena kammens ukkhitto kuppena atthAns- 
rahená "ti. evam vutte ukkhepakå bhikkhü ukkhittéon- 
vattake bhikkhü etad avocum: Apatti eså åvuso n' esd 
anåpatti, Apanno eso bhikkhu n’ eso bhikkhu an&panno, 
ukkhitto eso bhikkhu n' eso bhikkhu anukkbitto, dhammi- 
kena kammens ukkhitto akuppena tbånårahene, må kho 
tumhe &yasmanto etam ukkhittakam bhikkhum anuvattittha 
anuparivårethå 'ti. evam pi kho te ukkhittánuvattakA 
bhikkhà ukkhepekehi bbikkhühi vuocamånå tath’ eva tam 
ukkhittakam bhikkhum anuvattimsa anuparivdresum. [30 
atha kho вййаќаго bhikkhu yena bbagavå ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi. 
ekamentam nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantam etad avoca: 
idha bhante аййа{ато bbikkhu Apattim åpanno ahosi, so {алай 
Apattiyå Apattiditthi ahosi, afifle bhikkhü tamá Apattiyé 
anÅpettiditthino ahesum. so aparena samayena tasså Apattiyå 
anApattiditthi ahosi, aññe bhikkhü tasså ápettiyà ápatti- 
ditthino ahesum. atha kho te bhante bhikkhü . . . (=$ 1) 
+++ ражеуувп ti. atha kho te bhante bhikkhé . . . ukkhi- 
pipsu. во са bhante bhikkhu bahussuto ågatågamo ... 
sikkhåkmo. atha kho so bhante bhikkhu . . . alabhi kho so 
bhante bhikkhu sanditthe . . . alabhi kho so bhante bhikkhu 
jånapade pi . . . atha kho te bhante ukkhittånuvattakå . . . 
evam vutte bbante ukkhepakA . . . evam pi kho te bhante 
ukkhitt&nuvattaká bhikkhü ukkhepakebi bhikkhühi vucca- 
månå tath’ eva tam ukkhittakam bhikkhum anuvattanti 
anuparivårenttti. 141 atha kho bhagavå bhinno bhikkhu- 
samgho bhinno bhikkhusamgho ’ti utthåyåsanå yena ukkhe- 
pakå bhikkhü ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå paññatte 
sane nistdi. nisajja kho bbagavå ukkhepake bhikkhü etad 
avoca: må kho tumhe bhikkhave patibbåti no patibháti no 
"ti yasmim vå tasmim vå bhikkhum ukkhipitabbam maññittha. 
161 idha pana bhikkhave bhikkhu &pettim Apanno hoti, во 
{алва Apattiyå an&pattiditthi hoti, аййе bbikkht tassA åpattiyå 
Apattiditthino honti. te ce bhikkhave bhikkhü tam bhi- 
kkhum evam jånanti: ayam kho åyasmå behussuto ágatá- 
gamo . . . sikkhåkåmo, sace mayam imam bbikkhum 
Apattiyå adassane ukkhipissåma па mayam iminá bbikkhunk 


X.1.6-8.] MAHÅVAGGA. 339 


saddhim uposatham karissáma vin& iminå bhikkhuná ирова- 
tham karissåme, bhavissati samghassa tatonidånam bhanda- 
nam kelaho viggaho vivådo samghabhedo samgharåji samgha- 
vavatthánam samghanånåkaranan ti, bhedagarukehi bhikkh- 
ave bhikkhûhi na so bhikkhu &pattiy& adassane ukkhipitabbo. 
161 idha pena bhikkhave bhikkhu ápattim Apanno hoti, 
во tasså . . . ukkhipissáma na mayam iminå bhikkhuná 
saddhim pevåressåme vind iminå bhikkhunå pevåressåma, na 
mayam iminá bhikkhuná saddhim samghakammam kaorissåms 
тіпа iminå bhikkhuná samghakammam karissima, na mayam 
imin& bhikkhuná saddbim fsane nisidissima vind imind 
bhikkhund Asane nisidissáma, па mayam iminå bbikkhunå 
eaddhim yågupåne nisidissåma vind iminå bhikkhund yågu- 
påne nisidissåma, па mayam iminå bhikkhond saddhim 
bhattagge nistdissåma vind iminå bbikkhunå bhattagge nist- 
dissåma, xia mayam ішіоё bbikkhunå saddhim ekacchanne 
vasissåma vinå iminA bbikkhunå ekacchanne vasissåma, na 
mayam iminå bhikkhund eaddhim yathåvuddbam abhivüda- 
nam pecoutthånam añjalikammam såmioikammam kariseåme 
vinà iminå bhikkhunà yathdvuddham . . . sAmicikammam 
karissåma, bhavissati samghassa tatonidånam bhendanam 
kalsho viggaho vivådo samghabhedo samgheråji samghave- 
vatthánam samghanAndkaranan ti, bhedagarukehi bhikkhave 
bhikkhühi ne so bhikkhu åpattiyå adussane ukkhipitabbo 'ti. 
ЇТЇ atha kho bhagavå akkhepaküánam bhikkhünam etam 
attham bhåsitvå uttbåyåsanå yena ukkhittAnuvattaké bhi- 
kkhü ten’ upasamkemi, upesamkamitvá  paiüatte Åsane 
nisidi. nisajja kho bhegava ukkhittånovattake bhikkhü 
etad avoca: mà kho tumhe bhikkhave åpattim åpsjjitvå n’ 
ambå åpannå 'ti Apattim na petikàtabbem maññittha. idha 
pana bhikkhave bhikkhu Apsttim &panno hoti, so tassá 
åpattiyå andpattiditthi hoti, aññe bhikkhü tasså åpattiyå 
Apattiditthino honti. so oe bhikkhave bhikkhu te bhikkhü 
evam jånåti: ime kho åyasmantå behussutá ågatågamå 
dhammadberå vinayadharà måtikådbarå penpditå ууга 
medhávino lejjino kukkuccaké sikkhåkåmå, nålam mamam 
và kåranå аййеваш và kåranå chandå doså mobå bheyå 
agatim gantum, sace mam ime bhikkhü åpattiyå adaseane ` 


340 MAHÅVAGGA. (X. 1. 8-10. 


ukkhipissanti na mayå seddhim uposatham karissanti vind 
mayå uposatham karissanti, . . . na msyå saddhim pavå- 
reasanti vinå maya pavåressanti . . . vind mayñ yathå- 
vuddham abhivüdanam paecuttbánam afijalikammam såmi- 
cikammam karissanti, bhavissati samghasss tatonidAnam 
bhandanem kalaho viggaho vivådo samghabhedo samgheråji 
samghavavatthüánam samghanånåkerenan ti, bhedagarukena 
bhikkhave bhikkhunå paresam pi sandháya åpatti desetabbá 
‘ti. atha kho bhegavá ukkhitt&nuvattskánam bhikkhünem 
> etam attham bhåsitvå uttbåyåsanå pakkåmi. ||8 || 
tena kho pana samayena ukkhittànuvattak& bhikkhü tatth’ 
eva anto simåya uposatham karonti eamghakammam karonti, 
ukkhepaké pans bhikkhü nissimam gantvå uposatham ka- 
ronti samgbakammam keronti. atha kho afifiataro ukkhe- 
` рако bhikkhu yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå 
bhagavantam abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi. ekamantam 
nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantam etad avoca: te bhante 
ukkhittánuvattakA bhikkbd tatth’ eva anto simåya uposatham 
karonti samghakemmam karonti, mayam pana ukkbepakå 
bhikkhü nisstmam gantvå uposatham karoma samghakammam 
karomå 'ti. te ce bhikkhu uk khittánuvattakà bhikkbå tatth’ 
eva anto simåye uposatham karissanti samghskammam ka- 
rissanti yathá meyå flatti ca anussåvanå os pefifiattA, tesam 
tani kammåni dhammikáni bhavissanti akuppåni thandrahani. 
` tumhe ce bhikkhu ukkhepaká bhikkhü tatth’ eva anto stmåys 
uposatham karissathe samghakammam karissatha уве mayá 
fiatti ca anussávaná са pafifiattå, tumbåksm pi {Арі ksmmáni 
dhammikáni bhavissanti akuppåni tbånårsbåni. |1911 tam 
kissa hetu. nånåsamvåsskå ete bhikkhü tumhehi tumhe cs 
tehi n&nüsamvüsaká. dve'mà bhikkhu nün&samvüsskabhü- 
miyo: attanå va attánam nånåssmvåsakam karoti samaggo 
và nam samgho ukkhipsti adassane vå appatikamme тё 
eppatinissagge vå. imå kho bbikkhu dve nånåsamvåsakn- 
bhümiyo. dve "m& bhikkhu samånasamvåsakebbåmiye : 
attanå và attánam samånasamvåsakem karoti samaggo vè 
nam samgho ukkhittam osåreti adassane vA appatikamme vá 
sppatinissagge va. ima kho bhikkhu dve samåuasarmvåsake- 
bbåmiyo "ti. I 10] 11 


X 3.1-2] MAHÅVAGGA. 841 


tens kho pana samayene bhikkhü bhattagge antaraghare 
bhandansjåtå kelabejåtå vivådåpennå afifiamafifam ananu- 
lomikam kåyskammam vacikammam upadamsenti battha- 
paråmåsam karonti manusså ujjhåyanti khtyanti vip&centi : 
katham hi n&ma samanå Sakyaputtiyå bhattagge antaraghare 
upadamseesanti hatthsparámásam karissantiti, assomm 

kho bhikkhå tesam manussånam ujjháyantánam khiyantánam 
vipåcentånam. ye te bhikkhü eppiochå te ujjhåyanti kht- 
yanti vipáoenti: katham hi náma bhikkhü bhattagge antara- 
ghare . . . upadamsessanti hatthaparmásam karissantiti. 
atha kho te bhikkhü bhagaveto etam attham årocesum. 
eaccam kira bhikkheve — la — saccam bbagavå. vigarshitvå 
dhammikatham kstvå bhikkhü &mantesi: bhinne bhikkhave 
eamghe adhammiyamåne ssammodikfya vattamånåya ettå- 
vatå na aññamaññam enanulomikam kåyakammam vaci- 
kammam upadamsessáma hetthaparåmåsem karissåmå "ti 
Banane nisiditabbam. bhinne bhikkhave samghe dhammiye- 
måne sammodikáya vattamånåye åsanantarikåye nistditabban 
ti. [1] tena kho pana samayena bhikkhü samghamajjhe 
bhandanajaté . . . vivådåpannå afifiamafifiam mukhasattihi 
vitudantå viharenti, te na eakkonti tam adbikaranam våpa- 
sametum. atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavá ten" 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvà bhagavantam abbivådetvå ekam- 
antam atthdsi. eksmantam (hito kho so bhikkhu bhaga- 
vantam etad avoca: idha bhante bhikkbå samghamajjhe : . . 
vüpesametum. sådhu bhante bbagavå yena te bhikkh( ten’ 
upasamkamatu anukampam upådåyå 'ti. adbivásesi bhagavå 
tunhibhávena. atha kho bhagavå yena te bhikkhfi ten’ 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvA раййа(ќе åsane nisidi. nisajje 
kho bhegevá te bhikkhü etad avoca: alam bhikkhave må 
bhandanam má kalaham må viggeham má viv&den ti. evam 
vutte aññataro adbammavådt bhikkhu bhagavantam etad 
avoca: ågametu bhante bhagavA dbammasåmi, appomukko 
bhante bhagavå ditthadhammasukhaviharam enuyatto viha- 
ratu, mayam etena bhandanena kalahena viggahena vivadens 
pafifiåyismåmå "ti. dutiyam pi kho bhagavá te bhikkhü etad 
&voca: alam bhikkhave . .. må viváden ti. dutiyam pi 
kho so adbammevådt bhikkhu bhagavantam etad avoca: 


342 MAHÄVAGGA. [I. 3. 3-5. 


Agametu bhante . . . pafifiåyiseåmå "ti, atha kho bhagavá 
bhikkhå Amantesi : |12 |1 

bhütapubbam bhikkhave Bårånasiyam Brahmadatto 
nama Kåsir&jå ahosi eddho mahaddhano mabåbhogo ma- 
habbalo mahåvåhano mahåvijito paripunpakosakotthágáro. 
Dighiti náma Koealar&ja ahosi daliddo appadhano appe- 
bhogo eppabalo appavåhano appavijito aparipunnakosakotthå- 
garo. athe kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kasiråjå caturangi- 
nim senam sannayhitvå Dighitim Kosalaråjånam abbbuyykei. 
assosi kho bhikkhave Dighiti Kosalar&já: Brahmadatto kim 
Kåsiråjå caturanginim senam eannaybitvé mama abbhuyyáto 
ti. atha kho bhikkhave Dighitissa Kosalarniifio etad ahosi : 
Brahmadatto kho Kåsiråjå addho . . . paripunpnakosakotthå- 
gåro, aham pan’ amhi daliddo . . . aparipunnakosakotthågåro, 
náham petibalo Brahmadattena Kñsiraññá ekasamghátam pi 
sahitum. yam nånåham patigaco’ eva nagaramhå nippa- 
teyyan ti. atha kho bhikkhave Dighiti Kosalarájá mahesim 
ådåya patigaco' eva nagaramhé nippati. atha kho bhi- 
kkbave Brahmadatto Kåsiråjå Dighitisss Kosalaraüüo balan 
са våhenefi ca јаперадай ca kosañ ca kotth&gáraü ca 
abhivijiya ejjhávasati. atha kho bhikkhave Dighiti Kosa- 
larájá sapajüpstiko yena Bárápasi tena pakk&mi. anu- 
pubbena yena Bárápasi tad avesari. tatra sudam bhi- 
kkhave Dighiti  Kosalerájá  sapsjápatiko Båråpasiyam 
aññatarasmim paccantime okåse kumbhakárenivemane afiflå- 
takavesena paribbåjakacchannena pativasati. |3] athe kho 
bhikkhave Dighitissa Kosalarefifio maheei na oirass' eva 
gabbhioi ahosi. tasså evarüpo dohaļo hoti: icchati suriyass 
uggamanekåle caturanginim senam sannaddham vammikam 
subhummiyam thitam passitum khaggánaiü ca dhovanam 
påtum. athe kho bhikkhave Dighitiasa Kosalaraifio mahest 
Dighitim Kosalarájánam etad avoca: gabbhini 'mhi deva, 
tasså me evarüpo doha]o uppanno: icohAmi suriyama . .. 
påtun ti. kato devi amhákam duggastánam caturangint send 
sannsddhå vammikA subhummiyam {1А khaggünafi оа 
dhovanan ti. sac’ Aham deva па labhissámi marissdmiti. ||4] 
tena kho pana samayena bhikkbave Brahmadattessa Kási- 
rafifio purohito bráhmago Dighitissa Kosalarafifio sahåyo 


X.26-7) MAHÅVAGGA. 343 


hoti. atha kho bhikkhave Dighiti Kosalarájá yena Brahma- 
dattassa Kåsirafifio purohito bråhmano ten’ upasamkami, upa- 
samkamitvà Brahmadattassa Kåsirañiño purohitam bråhma- 
mam etad avoca: sakhi te samma gabbhini, tasså evarûpo 
dohajo uppanno: icchati suriyassa . . . pátun ti tena hi 
deva mayam pi devim passåmå 'ti. stha kho bhikkhave 
Dighitiesa Kosalaraiifio mahesi yena Brahmadattassa Kåsi- 
таййо purohito bråhmano ten’ npasamkami. addasa kho 
bhikkhave Brahmadattassa Kåsirafifio purohito bråhmano 
Dighitissa Kosalarafifio mahesim dårato "ға ágaochantim, 
disvana uttbåyåsanå ekamsam uttaråssigam karitvå yena 
Dighitissa Koealarafifio mahes? ten’ aüjalim penåmetvå 
tikkhattum udánam udånesi: Kosalaråjå vata bho kucchigato, 
Kosalaråjå vata bho kucchigato "і. avimanå devi hohi, 
lacchaasi suriyassa uggamanekåle caturanginim senam 
sannaddham vammikam subhummiyam tbitam passitum 
khaggåuafl ca dhovanam påtun ti. |151 etha kho bhikkhave 
Brahmedattassa Kasirafifio purohito bráhmano yena Brahma- 
datto Kåsiråjå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå Brahma- 
dattam Kéáairájánam etad avoca: tathá deva nimittåni 
dissanti, sve suriyuggamanekåle caturaigini send sanneddhå 
vammikå subhummiyam titthatu kheggå ca dhoviyent( ”ti. 
atha kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kåsiråjå manusse ånåpesi : 
yathå bhane purohito bråhmano dha tatbå karothå 'ti. alabhi 
kho bhikkhave Dighitissa Kosalaraiiiio mahest suriyassa 
uggamanakåle caturanginim senam aanneddham vammikam 
subhummiyam thitam passitum khagg4nafi ca dhovanam 
pátum. atha kho bhikkhave Digbitises Kosslarafiio maheet 
tasa даралма paripåkam anvåye puttam vijåyi, tassa 
Dighåvå 'ti nåmam ekamsu. atha kho bhikkhave Dighá- 
vukumåro па cirass' eva viññutam påpuni. |161 atha kho 
bhikkhave Dighitissa Kosalarafifio etad ahosi: ayam kho 
Brahmedatto Kåsiråjå bahuno amhákam snatthassa kárako, 
imin& amhåkem balañ ca våhanañ ca janepedo са koso са 
kottbågåraå ca acchinnam. sac’ Ayam amhe jånissati sabbeva 
tayo ghåtåpessti. yam nåoåham Dighåvukumåram bahi 
nagare våseyyan ti. atha kho bhikkhave Dightti Kosalaråjå 
Dighdvakum4ram bahi nagsre vásesi. atha kho bhikkhave 


344 MAHÄVAGGA. [X & 7-10, 


Dighåvukumåro bahi nagare pativasanto na cirass’ eva гаЪћа- 
віррапі sikkhi. ||7] tena kho pane samayena bhikkheve 
Dighitisss Kosalarañño kappeko Brahmadatte Kåsirafifie 
patvasati, addasa kho bhikkhave Dighitissa Kosalarafiio 
kappako Dighitim Kosalar&jånam sapajApatikam Bárüpasi- 
yam aññatarasmim paccantime okåse kumbhskáranivesane 
afliiåtakavesena paribb&jakacchannena pativasantam, disvana 
yena Brahmadatto Kåsiråjå ten’ upssamkami, upasamkamitvå 
Brahmadattam Kåsiråjånam etad avoca: Dighiti deva Kosala- 
råjå sapajüpatiko Bårånasiyam aiiflatarasmim paccantime 
okåse kumbhakåranivesane afifidtakavesena paribbAjakaccha- 
nnena pativasatiti. 11811 athe kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto 
Kåsiråjå manusse &püpesi: tena hi bhane Dighitim Kosala- 
råjånam sapsjåpatikem Anethé ‘ti. evam devå "ti kho 
bhikkhave te menusså Brahmadattassa Kasirafifio patissutvå 
Dighitim Kosalaråjånam sapsjåpatikam &nesum. atha kho 
bhikkhave Brahmedatto Kåsiråjå manusse üpApesi: tena bi 
bhape Digbitim Kosalsråjånam  sapajípatikam dalbåye 
rajjoyå pacchåbåbam g&]haebandhaoam bandhitvå khura- 
mundam karitvå kherassarena panavens rathiy&ya rathiyam 
singhátakena singh&takam parinetvå dakkhinena dvårena 
nikkhåmetvå dekkhipato nagarassa catudhé ohinditvå ca- 
tuddiså biláni nikkhipath4 "ti. evam devå 'ti kho bhikkhave 
te manusså Brahmadattassa KAwraüüo patisentvå Dighitim 
Kosalaråjånam sapsjåpatikam da]háya rejjuyé pecoh&bAham 
gålbabandhanam bandhitvå khursmupdam karitvà kharassa- 
rena panavena rathiyåya rathiyam singhátakena singh&takam 
parinenti. |9|| atha kho bhikkhave Dighåvusss kumårasm 
etad ahosi: ciraditthå kho me måtåpitaro. yam nün&ham 
måtåpitaro passeyyan ti. atha kho bhikkhave Dighåvu- 
kumáro Bårånpssim pavisitvA addasa måtåpitaro da]h&ya 
rajjuyå pecchåbåham  gá]habandhanam bendhitvå khura- 
mundam karitvå kherassarena pansvens rathiyáya rathiyam 
sifighAtakena singh&takam parinente, disvåna yena mátápi- 
taro ten’ upasamkami. айдала kho bhikkhave Dighiti 
Kosalaråjå Dighåvukumåram  dürato ‘va Agacohantam, 
disvåna Digbåvukumåram etad avoca: må kho tvam tits 
Dighévu digham passa mA rassam, na hi tite Dighåru 


X. 8. 10-13.) MAHAVAGGA. 345 


verens verá sammanti, втегепа hi ід Dighåvu verå 
sammantiti. |101 evam vutte bhikkhave te manusså Di- 
gbitim Kosalaråjånam etad avocum: ummattako ayam 
Dighiti Kosalaråjå vippalapati, ko imama Dighåvu, kam 
ayam evam dha: må kho tvam tåta Dighåvu digham passa 
mA талга, na hi tåte Digbåvu verens verá sammanti, ave- 
rena hi tata Dighåvu verá sammantiti. náham bhane 
ummattako vippalapåmi, api ca yo vifi so vibhåvessattti. 
dutiyam pi kho bhikkhave — la — tatiyam pi kho bhikkhave 
Dighiti Kosalarájà Digbåvukumåram etad avoca: må kho 
+ ++ SAmmantiti tatiyam pi kho bhikkhave te manusså 
Dighitim Kosalarájánam etad avocum: ummattako . . . so 
vibhåvessatiti. ва kho bhikkhave te manussá Dighitim 
Kosalaráj&nam sapaj&patikam rathiyåye rathiyam singh&ta- 
kena singh&takam parinetvå dakkhinena dvérena pikkbå- 
metvå dakkhinato nagarassa catudhá chinditvA catuddiså 
bilåni nikkhipitvå gumbam tbapetvå pekkamimsu. ||111! 
atha kho bhikkhave Dighåvukuméro Bårånasim pavisitvá 
suram niheritvå gumbiye påyesi. yadå te mettå ahesum 
patitå atha kattbåni samkeddhitvå citakam karitvå måtåpi- 
tunnam sarfram citakam &ropetvá aggim datvå pañjaliko 
tikkhattum citakam padakkhinam akAsi. tena kho pana 
eamayena bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kåsiråjå uperipåsådava- 
ragato hoti. addasa kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kåsiråjå 
Dighévokumaram pafijalikam tikkhattum citakam padakkhi- 
nam karontam, disvAn’ assa etad ahosi: nissamsayam kho so 
таполю Dighitissa Kosalarafifio ПАН và sålohito vå, aho 
me anatthako, па hi nåma me koci årocessatiti. |12]| atha 
kho bbikkhave Digbåvukumåro атаййа gantvå yåvadattbam 
kanditvå roditvå vappam puüchitvà Båråpasim pavisitvå ante- 
рпгалва såmantå hatthisàlam gantvå hetthdcariyam etad 
evoca: icchám' aham åcariya sippam eikkhitun ti. tena hi 
bhane mápavaka sikkhassü "ti. athe kho bhikkhave Digbå- 
vukumåro rattiyå paocüsasamayam paccutthdya hatthisAla- 
yam maüjuná sarena gayi vinai ca vådesi. assosi kho 
bhikkbave Brahmedatto Kåsiråjå rattiyá pacchcasamayam 
paccuttháya hatthisál&yarn mafijund serena gitam vinafi ca 
våditam,-sutvåna manusse pucchi: ko bhape rattiyå paocüsa- 


346 MAHAVAGGA. [X 3. 13-16. 


samayam peccutthåya hatthisAlAyam mafijuná sarena gåyi 
vinafi са vüdeeiti. ||13| amukassa deva hatthácariyassa ante- 
våsi manavako rattiyå paoofsasamayam paocutthåya hettbiså- 
làyam mafljunå sarena gayi тілей ca vådesiti. tena bi bhane 
tam mAnavakam AnethA "ti. evam devå 'ti kho bhikkhave te 
manusså Brahmadattassa Kåsiraåfio patissutvå Dighåvu- 
kamåram ånesum. tvam bbane månavaka rattiyå paocüsa- 
samayam pacouttbåya hatthisålåyam mafjun& вагепа gåyi 
vinafi ca vådesiti. evam devå 'ti. tena hi tvam bhane 
månavaka gåyassu vinaii ca vüdehiti. evam devå 'ti kho 
bhikkhave Dighüávukum&ro Brehmadattassa Kåsirañño pati- 
ssutvå &rádhápekho mafijuná sarena gayi vinail ca vüdesi. 
atha kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kåsiråjå Dighåvukumårarm 
etad avoca: tvam bhane mánavaka mam upatthahd ’ti. 
evam devå 'ti kho bhikkhave Dighåvukumåro Brahma- 
dettasss Калїгаййо paccassosi. atha kho bhikkhave Dighé- 
vukumáro Brahmadsttasss Kåsirafio pubbutthayi ahosi 
pacch&nipát! kimkárapatissávi man&pacári piyavådi. satha 
kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kåsiråjå Dighåvukumåram na 
cirass’ eva abbhantarike vissüsikattháne thapesi. | l4] atha 
kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kásir&jà Dighåvukumåram etad 
avoca: tena hi bhane månavaks ratham yojehi migavam 
gemimmiti. evam devà ”ti kho bbikkhave Digh&vukumáro 
Brahmedsttassa Kåsirafifio patissutvå ratham yojetvå Brahma- 
даат Kåsiråjånam etad avoca: yutto kho te deva ratho, 
yasasa dáni kålam mafifiastti. atha kho bhikkhave Brahma- 
datto Küsirájà ratham abhirühi, Dighévukuméro ratham 
pesesi, tatbå-tathå ratham pesesi yathå-yathå aüüen' eva senå 
agamåsi afifien’ eva ratho. atha kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto 
Kåsiråjå düram gentvà Dighåvukumåram etad avocs: tena 
hi bhane mápsvaka ratham muñcassu, kilanto "mhi nipejjissá- 
miti evar devå ”ti kho bhikkhave Digbåvukumåro Brahma- 
dattassa КАзігаййо patissutvå ratham muñcitvå pathaviyam 
pallañkena nisfdi. atha kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kasi- 
råjå Dighåvukumårasss uochnnge sisam katvå seyyam 
kappesi, tassa kilantassa muhuttaken' eva niddam okkami 
[15] аа kho bhikkbeve Dighåvusss kumårase etad 
&hosi: ayam kho Brahmadatto Kåairåjå babuno amhákam 


L £16-17.] MAHÅVAGGA. 847 


anatthassa kårako, iminå ambåkam Ьа!ай ca våhanefl са 
janapado са koso ca kotthågåra ca acchinnam iminå ca 
me måtåpitaro het. ayam khv assa kålo yo "ham veram 
appeyyan ti kosiyå khaggam nibbåhi. atha kho bhikkhave 
Digbåvusss kumüressa etad ahosi: pitå kho mam mars- 
ае атаса: må kho tvam tåte Digbåvu digham passa må 
тамар, па hi tåta Digbåvu verena verá sammanti, averena 
hi táts Dighåvu verá sammantiti. na kho me tam patiråpam 
yo "ham pitu vacanam atikkameyyan ti kosiyå khaggam 
pevesesi. dutiyam pi kho bhikkhave Dighåvussa kumårassa 
etad аһоаї: ayam kho Brahmadatto . . . nibbáhi. dutiyam 
pi kho bhikkhave Dighávussa kumárassa etad аһоєі: pit 
+ + . Btikkameyyan ti, punad eva kosiyå khaggam pavesesi. 
tatiyam pi kho . . . nibbåhi. tatiyam pi kho . . . pavesesi. 
atha kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kåsiråjå bhito ubbiggo 
ussanki utrasso sahaså vutthási. athea kho bhikkhave 
Digh&vukumáro Brahmadattam Kåsiråjånam etad avoca: 
kisa tvam deva bhito .. . vutth&siti. idba mam bhane 
mánavake Dighitisss Koealaraüüo putto Dighåvukumåro 
supinentens khaggena paripåtesi ten&ham Бо ubbiggo 
ussafiki utrasso sahaså votthásin ti. | 16 atha kho bhikkh- 
ave Dighåvukumåro våmens hatthena Brahmadattasss Küsi- 
таййо eisam paråmasitvå dakkhinena hattbena kbeggam 
nibbåhetvå Brahmadattam Kasirdjanam etad avoca: аһа 
kho so dova Digbitissa Koealaraüüo putto Dighåvukumåro. 
bahuno tvam ambåkam anatthessa kårako, tayå amhükam 
balaü са v&hanaü ca janapado са koso ca kottbågårafi ca 
ecchinnam tayå ca me måtåpitaro hatå. ayam khv assa kAlo 
yv Аһаш veram appeyyan ti. athe kho bhikkhave Brahma- 
datto Kåsiråjå Digh&vossa kumárassa pådesu siraså nipatitvå 
Digbårukumåram etad avoca: jivitam me tåta Digbåvu debi, 
jivitam me tåta Digbåvu dehiti. ky åham ussshümi devassa 
jivitam dátum, devo kho me jivitam dadeyyA 'ti. tena hi 
tate Digbåvu tvan o’ eva me jivitam dehi ahefi ca te jivitam 
dammiti. atha kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto ca Kåsiråjå 
Dighåvu ca kumåro aññamafñiñasss jivitam adamau påniå са 
aggshesum sapatbaå ca akamsu adråbbåye. atha kho bhi- 
kkhave Brahmadatto Kásirájá Dighåvukumåram etad avoca : 


348 MAHÅVAGGA. [X. 8. 17-20. 


tena hi tåta Dighåvu ratham yojehi gamissåmå 'ti. evam 
devà ‘ti kho bbikkhave Dighåvukumåro Brahmadattasse 
KAsiradiio patissutvå ratham yojetvå Brahmadattam КАлїгА- 
jinam etad avoca: yutto kho te deva ratho, yama dAni 
kålam шаййалїН. atha kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kási- 
raja гает sbhirühi, Dighåvukumåro ratham pesesi, tathå 
-tathà ratham pesesi yatbå-yathå na cirass’ eva sendya samå- 
gacchi. |1171 atha kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kåsiråjå 
Bårånasim pavisitvà amaooe pürisajje sannipåtåpetvå etad 
avoca : sace bhane Dighitissa Kosalarafifio puttam Dighávu- 
kumáram passeyyåthe kinti nam kereyyåtbå ‘ti. eksos 
evam áhamsu: mayam deva hatthe ohindeyyáma, mayam 
deva påde chindeyyåme, mayam deva betthapåde chindeyyå-- 
ma, mayam deva kanne chindeyyüme, mayam deva nåsam 
ohindeyyåms, mayam deva kannandsam chindeyyAma, mayam 
deva steam ohindeyyåmå 't ayam kho bhane Dighitises 
Kosalaraüüo putto Dighdvukumaro, nåyam labbbå kiñoi 
kátam, iminå са me jivitam dinnam mayá ca imassa jivitam 
dinnan ti. 1181 atha kho bhikkhave Brahmadatto Kåsiråjå 
Dighåvukumåram etad avoca: yam kho te tata: Dighávu 
pita maranakåle атаса: må kho tvam tata Digh&vu digham 
passa må rassam, па hi tata Digbåvu verena verá sammanti, 
averena hi tata Dighåvu verá sammantiti, kin te pitå 
sandbåya avacá 'ti. yam kho me deva pits maranakile 
avaca må dighen ti, má cirem veram akásiti, imam kho me 
deva pitå maranakále атаса må dighan ti. yam kbo me 
deva pit marapakàle атаса må rassan ti, må kbippam 
mittehi bhijjitthå ’ti, imam kho me deva pith marapakále 
атаса må rassan ti. yam kho me deva pitå marapakåle 
avaca na hi táta Dighåvu verena verá sammanti, averena hi 
táta Dighåvu verá sammantiti, devena me mátápitaro hatå 
"ti, вао’ áham devam jivitå voropeyyam ye devassa atthakåmå 
te mam jivitå voropeyyum, ye me atthakámà te te jivitå 
voropeyyum, evam tam veram verens na vüpasamoyya. 
idáni са pana me devena jivitam dinnam mayå ca devassa 
jivitam dinna, evam veram averena vOpasantam. imam kho 
me deva pitå maranakåle атаса: na hi tata . . . sammantiti, 
{191 atha kho bhikkhave Brahmedatto KasirAjA acchari- 


X. 3. 20-8. 1.) MAHÅVAGGA. 349 


yam vata bho abbhutam vata bho, yåva pandito ayam 
Dighåvukumåro, yatra hi ойша pituno samkhittena bhåsi- 
tassa vitthdrena attham  &jánissatiti, pettikam balañ ca 
våhanafi ca jenepedafi ca ковай ca kotthågårafi ca patipAdest 
dhitaraü ca edåsi. tesam hi náma bbikkhave rájünam 
&dinnadandånam AdinnasatthAnam evarüpam khantisoreccam 
bbavissatiti, idha kho pana tam bhikkhave sobhetha yam 
tumhe evam svåkkhåte dhammevinsye pabbajitå eamånå 
kham& ca bhaveyyåtha soratå cA 'ti. tatiyam pi kho bba- 
gavå te bhikkhü etad avoca: alam bhikkhave må bhanda- 
nam må kalaham må viggeham må vivådan ti. tatiyam pi 
kho so adhammavüdi bhikkhu bhagavantam etad avoca: 
&gametu bbante bbagavå dhammesåmi, eppoasukko bhante 
bhegavà ditthadhammasukhaviháram anuyutto viharatu, 
mayam etena bhandanena kelehena viggahena vivüdena 
pafifåyiseåmå ‘ti. atha kho bhagavA pariyüdinnarüp& kho 
ime moghapuriså, ne уйше sukerå saññápetun ti utth&- 
yåsanå pakkåmi. [202] 
Dighåvubhånavåram pathamam. 


atha kho bhagavá pubbanhasamayam nivåsetvå pattaci- 

varam Adaya Kosambim pindåya påvisi, Kosambiyam 
pindåya caritvå pacchåbbattam pindapåtepatikkanto senåsa- 
nam samsåmetvå pattacivaram ådåya samghamsjjhe thitako 
"та ima gåthåyo abbåsi : 

puthusaddo samajano na bålo koci mafiflatha 

samghasmim bhijjamånesmim, n’ aññam bbiyyo amafifia- 

rum.| 

parimutthá panditå bhåså våcågocarabhånino, 

yåv' icchanti mukbåyåmam, yena nité na tam vidd.| 

akkocchi mam, evadhi mam, ajini mam, ahási me, 

ye tam upanaybanti, veram tesam na sammati.| 

akkoochi mam, avedhi mam, ajini mam, abåsi me, 

ye tam ma upanayhanti, veram tes’ üpasammati.| 

na hi verena veråni sammant’ idha kudAcanam, 

б averena ca eammanti, esa dhammo sanantano.| 
pare ca na vijánanti mayam etthe yamåmase, 
ye са tattha vijånanti, tato sammanti medhaga.| 


350 MAHÅVAGGA. [X.5. 1-4 3. 


rattham vilumpamánánam tesam pi hoti eamgeti. kasmå 


tumbákam no siyå.| 

sace labhetha nipskam sahåyam ssddhificaram sådhuvi- 
håri dhiram, 

abhibbuyya sabbåni рагівзауёпі careyya ten’ attamano 
eatimå.| 

no ce labhetha nipakam sabåyam saddhiücaram sådhuvi- 
hari dhtram 

råjå va табат vijitam pahåye eko care шА(айдагаййе 
va någo.! 


ekassa caritam seyyo, n’ Atthi bale sahåyatå. 


eko care na ca påpåni kayirá — métanigarafifie 
10 va någo "ti. [1131] 


atha kho bhagavå samghamsjjhe thitako 'va imå gåthåyo 
bhåaitvå yena Bålakslonekåragåmo ten’ upasamkami. 
tena kho pana samayena åyasmå Bhagu Bålakalonakåra- 
gåme vibarati: addasa kho &yssmá Bhagu bhagavantam 
dårato 'va ågacohantam, disvåna &sanam paiifidpesi pådoda- 
kam pádepitham pádakathalikam upenikkhipi, paccuggantvå 
: pattacivaram patiggahesi. nisidi bhagavd paüüatte Asane, 
nisajja раде pekkhálesi. AyasmApi kho Bhagu bhagavantam 
&bhivüdetvà ekamsntam nisidi, ekamentam nisinnam kho 
Ayasmantam Bhagum bhagavá etad вуоса: kacci bhikkhu 
khamantyam, kacci yápentyam, kacci pigdakene na kilama- 
siti. khamaniyam bhegavå, yápantyam bhegavå, ne cåbam 
bhante pindakena kilamåmiti. atha kho bhagavå dyasmantam 
Bhagum dhammiyå katháya sandassetvå . . . sampahamsetvå 
uttbåyåsanå yena Påcinavamsadåyo ten’ upasamkami 
lll tena kho pana samayena áyasmá са Anuruddho 
åyasmå ca Nandiyo üyasmá ca Kimbilo Pácinavamsadáye 
vibaranti. addasa kho d&yspálo bhagavantam dürsto 'va 
&gacchentam, disvina bhagavantam etad avoca: må samana 
etam dåyam påvisi, sant’ ettha tayo kulaputtA attakámarüpà 
viharanti, må tesam apbüsam akásiti assosi kho åyasmå 
Anuruddho dáyapálassa bhagavaté saddhim mantayaméuasss, 
sutvà dåyapålam etad avoca : måvuso дАуарА1а bhagavantam 


4.424] MAHÅVAGGA. 351 


våresi, satthå no bhagavå anuppatto 'ti. atha kho åyasmå 
Anurnddho yenåyasmå ca Nandiyo åyasmå ca Kimbilo ten” 
upasamkami, upasamkamitvà &yasmantam ca Nandiyam 
Ayasmantam са  Kimbilam etad  a&voca : abhikkama- 
tbåyasmento abhikkamathdyasmanto, satthà no bhagavå 
anuppstto "tL |21 аа kho йуазшА са Anuruddho 
åyasmå ca Nandiyo &yasmá ca Kimbilo bhegavantam 
pecouggantvü eko bhagavato pattacivaram  petiggahesi, 
eko Asanam райййревї, eko pådodakam pådapitham páda- 
kathalikem upanikkhipi  nisidi bbagavà paüilatte &sane, 
nisajje påde pakkbålesi te pi kho åyasmantå bhagavantam 
abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidimsu. ekamantam nisinnam 
kho Syasmantam Anuruddham bhagavà etad evoca: kaooi 
vo Anuruddbà khamaniyam, keoci yápaniyam, kacci pinda- 
kena na kilamatbå 'ti. khamantyam bhagavå, yApaniyam 
bhagavå, na ca mayam bhante pindakena kilamåmå "ti, 
kacci рапа vo Ånuruddhå samaggå sammodamáná avivada- 
mán& khirodakibhaté aññamaññam piyacakkhühi sampa- 
mantå viharathá 'ti. taggha mayam bhante samaggå 
sammodamånå avivadam&n& kbirodakibbOtå aññamaññam 
piyacakkhObi sampassantå viharámà 'ti. ystbåketham pana 
tumhe Anuruddhé samaggå sammodamånå . . . sampassantá 
viharsthá "ti. |3| idha meyham bhante evam hoti: låbbå 
vata me, suladdham vata me yo 'ham evarüpehi aabrahma- 
cáribi eaddbim viberåmiti. tassa mayham bhante imesn 
Ayasmantesu mettam küáyakemmam  pacoupatthitam Avi o 
eva raho са, mettam vacikammam, mettam manokammam 
paccupatthitam Avi o' eva raho ca. tassa mayham bhante 
evam hoti: yam nün&ham sakam cittam nikkhipitvà imesam 
yeva åyesmantånem oittassa vasene vatteyyan ti. so kho 
abam bhente sakam cittam nikkbipitvå imesam yeva 
&yasmantánam cittassa vasens vattámi, nånå hi kho по 
bhante k&y& екай ca pana шайќе cittan ti. fyasmapi kho 
Nandiyo, àyasmápi kho Kimbilo bhagavantam etad avoca: 
mayham pi kho bhante evam hoti: låbhå . . . maññe cittan 
ti. evam kho mayam bhante samaggå sammodamånå aviva- 
damán& khirodakibhütá añiñamaññam piyscakkhühi sampa- 
ssantå vihar&má 'ti. |4|| kacoi pana vo Anuruddhå appa- 


352 MAHAVAGGA, [Х. 4. 6-0. 


mattA МАрїпө pahitattå vibarathá 'ti. taggha mayam bhante 
appamatt Ai&pino pebitattå viharåmå ‘ti. yathikatham 
pans tumhe Anuroddbå appamattå &tápino pahitattà viha- 
rathá 'ti, idha bbante amhákam yo pathamam gåmeto pip- 
дауа patikkamati, so &sanam paññápeti, pádodakam páda- 
pitbam pádakathalikam upanikkhipati, avakkårapåtim dho- 
vitvå upatthApeti, paniyam paribhojaniyam upetthápeti. yo 
pacchå gámato pindáya petikkamati, sace hoti bhuttåvaseso, 
васе &kankbsti, bbufijati, no ce &kankhati, appaharite va 
chaddeti appánake vá udake opilåpeti, во Asanam uddharati, 
pådodakam püdapitham pádakatbelikam petisámeti, avakkå- 
rapåtim dhovitvà patieAmeti, pániyam paribhojaniyam peti- 
såmeti, bhattaggam sammejjeti. yo passati påniyaghatam 
vå paribhojaniyaghatam vå vaocaghatam và rittam tuocham 
so upatth&peti. вас’ assa hoti avisayham hatthavikårene, 
«dutiyam &mantetvà hattbavilanghakena upatthdpema, na tv 
eva mayam bhante tappaocayå våcam bhindáma. peficAhilam 
kho pana mayam bbante aabbarattiyA dhammiy& kathåye 
sannisidåme. evam kho mayam bbante sppamattå &tpino 
pabitattå viharåmå ”ti. [|5 || 

athe kho bhagavå åyaamantarn са Anuruddham Ayasmantam 
ca Nandiyam åyasmantam ca Kimbilam dhammiyå kathdya 
sandassetvå . . . sampahamsetvà utthåyåsanå yena Påri- 
leyyakam tena cårikam pakkami. anupubbena cárikam 
caramáno yena Párileyyskam tad avasari. tatra audam 
bhagavå Pårileyyake viharati Rakkhitavanasande 
Bheddas&lamüle. athe kho bhagavato rahogatassa pati- 
eallinassa evam cetaso parivitakko udap&di: aham kho pubbe 
åkinno na phásu vihásim tehi Kosambakebi bbikkhühi 
bhandanakArakehi kalahakárakehi viv&dak&rakehi bbassskå- 
rakehi samghe edhikaranakårakehi, so "mhi etarahi eko 
adutiyo sukbam pbåsu vibarámi afifiatr' eva tehi Kosamba- 
kohi bhikkhühi kslshakårakehi . . . adhikarapakArakebiti. 
afifiatero pi kho bstthinågo åkinno vibarati bsttbihi hatthi- 
nihi hatthikelabhehi hatthioohåpakebi, ohinnaggåni с’ eva 
tipáni khádati, obhaggobheggafi c' assa såkhåbhaögem kbå- 
danti, åvilåni са påniyåni pivati, ogühantaasa otiņņasa 
hatthiniyo k&yam upanighamsantiyo gaochanti. аа kho 


1468.2) MAHÅVAGGA. 353 


tassa hattbinågassa etad ahosi: sham kho Akinno viharåmi 
hatththi hatthinthi hatthikalabhohi hatthioohåpakehi, chinna- 
ggåni o’ eva tinåni khådAmi, obhaggobhaggail ca me sikhA- 
bhangam kbådanti, åvilåni ca påniyåni pivåmi, ogdhantassa 
me otinnassa hatthiniyo kåyam upanighemsantiyo gacchanti. 
yam nånåham eko'va ganasmá vüpaksttho vihareyyan ti. 
16] atha kho so hatthinågo yûtbå epakkamma yena Påri- 
leyyekam Rakkhitavanasaydo Bhaddasilamilam yena bha- 
gavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvà sondåya bhagavato 
påniyam paribhojaniyam upatthApeti appaheritafi ca karoti. 
atha kho tassa hatthinågassa etad abosi: aham kho pubbe 
&kinno na phásu vihåsim hatthihi hatthinihi hatthikalabhehi 
hatthicchApakehi, chinnaggáni c' eva tipåni kbådim, obhaggo- 
bhaggail ca me såkbâbhañgam kbådimsu, åvilåni ca påniyåni 
apAyim, ogåhantasss ca me otinnassa hatthiniyo káyam upe- 
nighameantiyo agamerso, so "Ьі etarahi еко adutiyo 
sukham pbåsu viharåmi efilatr' eva hetthibi hatthinihi 
hatthikaJabhebi battbiochåpehiti. atha kho bbagavå attano 
ca pavivekam viditvå tassa ca hatthin&gassa cetaså cetopari- 
vitakkam afifidye tåyam veláyam imam udånam udápesi : 
evam nágassa någene fsådantassa hatthino 
вашей cittam oittena yad eko rameti vane 'ti. 171140 


atha kho bhagavå Pårileyyake yathübhirentam vibaritvå 
yena Såvatthi tena cårikam pakkámi. anupubbena cåri- 
kam caramåno yena Såvatthi tad avssari. tatra sudam 
bhagsvå Såvattbiyam vihareti Jetavane Anátha- 
pindikassa åråme. atha kho Kosambakå upåsakå ime 
kho вууё Kosambakå bhikkhü bahuno smbåkam anatthasss 
kårakå, imehi ubbá]ho bhagavå pakkanto, hands mayam ayye 
Kosambake bhikkbå n’ eva abbivådeyyåma na paccuttheyyå- 
me na aüjalikbammam e&micikammam kareyyåme na sakka- 
reyyáma na garukareyyåms na måneyyåma na påjeyyåma 
upagatånam pi pindepåtam пе dajjeyyåma, етет ime amhehi 
axakkariyamånå egsrukeriyamånå amåniyamåvå ep0jiysmånå 
asakkårapakatå pakkemiesanti vå vibbhamissanti vå bhaga- 
vantam vá pasådessantfti. |1|| atha kho Kosambakå upåsakå 
Kosambake bhikkhü n eva abhivadesum na paccuttheeum ne 


то. HL 23 


354 MAHÁVAGGA. [X. 5. 2-5. 


efljalikammam såmicikammam a&kamsu na sskkarimsu па 
garukerimeu na månesum na püjesum upagatánam pi pinda- 
påtam na adamsu. atha kho Kosambaká bhikkhà Kosamba- 
kehi upásakehi asakkariyamånå . . . asakkårapakatå evam 
Ahamsu: handa mayam üvuso Büvatthim gantvå bhaga- 
vato santike imam adhikeranam vüpesamemá "ti. stha kho 
Kosambakå bhikkhü sen&ásanam samsåmetvå pattacivaram 
Адйув yena Sávatthi ten’ upasamkamimau. ||2 || 

assosi kho åyasmå Båriputto: te kira Kosambakå bhi- 
kkhå bbandenaküraká . . . samghe adhikaranakårakå Bå- 
vatthim Agacchantiti. atha kho &yasmá Såriputto yene 
bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upesamkamitvà bhagavantam 
abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi. ekamantam nisinno kho 
Ayasmå Såriputto bhagavantam etad avoca: te kira bbante 
Kosembaká bhikkhü bhendenskårakå . . . samghe adhika- 
ranakárakü Såvatthim Agacchenti. kethåbam bhante tesa 
bhikkhüsu patipajjamiti. tena hi tvam Såriputta yethå- 
dbammo tathå titthühtti. katbåham bhante jåneyyam 
dhammam vå adhammam vá "ti. |9[| 

attbårasahi kho Såriputte vatthOhi adhammavádi jani- 
tabbo. idha Såriputta bhikkhu adhammam dhammo ’ti 
dipeti, dhammam edhammo "ti dipeti, avinayam vinayo "ti 
d., vinayam avinayo ’ti d., abbåsitam alapitam tetbågatens 
bhåsitam lapitam tathågatenå "ti d., bbåsitam lapitam tathå- 
gatene abhásitom alapitam tatbågatenå 'ti d., anücinpam 
tathágatena &cinnam tathågatenå ‘ti d., &cinpam tathága- 
tena enåcinnam tathågatenå 'ti d., appaiiattam tathágatena 
paüüattam tathàgaten& 'ti d., paüüattam tathügatena appa- 
üüattem tathdgatend 'ti d., anåpattim åpattiti d., &pattim 
anápattiti d., lahukam ápsttim garuká åpattiti Å, garukem 
ápattim lahuká ápattiti d., såvasesam åpattim eanavaseså 
&pattiti d., anavasesam Apattim såvaseså åpatliti d, dutthu- 
llam Apattim edutthullå dpattiti d, adutthullam épattim 
dutthullá åpettiti dipeti. imehi kho Sáriputta attháresahi 
vetthühi adbammavådi janitabbo. ||4|| atthårasabi ca kho 
Såriputta vatthühi dhammavådi janitabbo. idha Sáriputta 
bhikkhu adhammam adhsmmo ”ti dipeti, dhammam dhammo 
i d, avineyam . . ., vineyam . . ., abbåsitam alapitam 


X. 8. 6-9.] MAHÅVAGGA. 355 


tatbågatene . . ., bhásitam lapitam tathdgatena . . ., anå- 
cinpam tetbågatens . . ., åcinnam tathügatena . . ., 
appaññattam tathågatens . . ., paüüettam tathågatens . . ., 
&pattim . . ., anåpettim . . ., Ishukam åpattim . . ., garu- 
kam åpattim . . ., sávasesam åpattim . . ., anavasesam 
Apattim . . ., dutthullam åpattim . . ., adutthullam Apattim 
adutthullà Apattiti dipeti. imehi kho Sáriputta atthårasehi 
vatthåbi dhammavádi jånitabbo "ti. ||5]| 

assosi kho åyasmå Mabåmoggellåno — la — assoai kho 
Ayasmá Mahåkaesapo, assosi kho áyasmá Mahákaccáno, 
essoai kho åyasmå Mabåkotthito, assosi kho åyasmå Ma- 
håkappino, assosi kho Ayasmå Mahåcundo, assosi kho 
åyasmå Anuruddho, assosi kho åyasmå Revato, assosi 
kho &yaamå Upåli, assosi kho &yasmá Anando, aasosi kho 
Ayasmá Råhulo: te kira Kosambaká bhikkhü . . . (=3-5. 
Read Råhula instead of Báriputta) . . . dhammavádi jåni- 
tebbo "ti. |16 

assosi kho Mahåpajåpatt Gotami: te kira Kosambaká 
bhikkhü . . . &gacchantiti. atha kho Mahåpsjåpati Gotami 
yena bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavan- 
tam abhivådetvå ekemantam attbåsi. ekamantam thité kho 
Mabåpsjåpati Gotami bbagavantam etad avoca: te kira 
bhante . . . patipajjámiti. tena hi tvam Gotami ubhayattha 
dhammam вира, ubbayattha dhammam sutvå ye tattha bhi- 
kkbà dbammavådino tesam ditthifi ca khentid ca гисій ca 
&dáyail ca rocehi, уай ca kifici bhikkhunisamghene bhikkhu- 
samgbato paccüsimsitabbam sabban tam dharmmavádito 'va 
paccåsimsitabban ti. |71 assosi kho Anåthapindiko ga- 
hapati: te kira Kosambakå bhikkhü . . . ágacchentiti. 
atha kho Anåthapindiko gahepati yena bhagavå ten’ upa- 
samkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam ebbivådetvå ekaman- 
tam nisidi, ekamantam nisinno kho Avåthapindiko gabapati 
bhagavantam etad avoca: te kira bhante . . . patipajjá- 
miti. tena hi тата gahapati ubbayotthe dånam dehi, ubha- 
ува dånam datvå ubhayattha dhammam вира, ubhayattha 
dhammam sutvå ye tattha bhikkhü dhammavüdino tesam 
ditthiñ ca kbantifi ca гисїй ca AdAyafi ca rocehiti. ||B|| вавові 
kho Visåkhå Migáram&t&: te kira Kosambakå bhikkhü 


356 MAHÅVAGGA. [X 8. 9-13. 


. + + agacchantiti. atha kho Visikhå Migåremåtå yena 
bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam 
&bhivüdetvà ekamantam nisidi ekamantam nisinnå kho 
Visåkhå MigåramåtA bhagavantam etad avoca: te kira 
bhante . . . patipajjdmiti. tena hi tvam Visákhe ubha- 
yatthe dånam dehi . . .' rocehíti. 191 

atha kho Kosambaká bhikkhü anupubbens yena Såvatthi 
tad avasarum. atha kho áyasmá Såriputto yena bhegavå 
ten’ upasamkami, upasamkamitv& bhagavantam abhivådetvå 
ekamantam nisidi. ekamantam nisinno kho åyasmå Såriputto 
bhagavantam etad атоса : te kira bhante Kossmbakå bhi- 
kkhú bhandanakáraká . . . samghe adhikarepakáraká Så- 
vattbim anuppattá. katham nu kho bhante tesu bhikkbisu 
senåsane patipajjitabban ti. tena hi Báriputta vivittam senå- 
sanam dátabban ti. васе pana bhante vivittam па hoti 
katham patipajjitabban ti. tena hi Báriputta vivittam 
katvåpi dátabbam. na tv evåham Såriputta kenaci pariyå- 
yena vaddhatarassa bhikkhuno sen&sanam petibåhitabban ti 
vadåmi. yo patibdheyya, Apatti dukkatassá "ti. &mise pana 
bhante katham patipajjitebban ti.  &misam kho Såriputta 
eabbesam samakam bhájetabban ti. || 10 | 

atha kho tassa ukkhittakessa bbikkhuno dbammså ca 
vinayafi ca paccavekkhantassa etad ahosi: Apatti eså n’ es 
andpatti, åpanno 'mhi n’ amhi anápanno, ukkhitto "mhi n’ 
ambi anukkhitto, dhammiken' ambi kammena ukkhitto 
akuppena thánárahená ’ti. atha kho so ukkhittako bhikkhu 
yena ukkbittånuvattakå bhikkhü ten’ upessmkemi, upa- 
samkamitvá ukkhittånuvattake bhikkhü etad avoca: patti 
esd üvuso п’ eså apüpatti . . . thdndrahena. etha mam 
&yasmanto osåretbå "ti. |111 aths kho te ukkhittånuvattakå 
bhikkhó tam ukkhittakam bhikkhum Adaya yena bhagavå ten" 
upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivådetvå 
ekamantam nisidimsu. ekamantam nisinnå kho te bkikkht 
bhagavantam etad avooum: ayam bhante ukkhittako bhikkhu 
evam üha: Apatti езй åvuso п’ eså anüpatti . . . osårethå ’ti. 
katham nu kho tehi bhante patipajjitabban ti йара 
еза bhikkhave n’ eså anåpatti, Apanno eso bhikkhu n’ es 
bhikkhu enåpanoo, ukkhitto eso bhikkhu n’ eso bhikkhu 


X. 5. 12-14.] MAHÅVAGGA. 357 


anukkhitto, dhammikens kammena ukkhitto akuppens 
thånårahena, yato са kho so bhikkhave bhikkhu Apanno са 
ukkhitto ca passati ca tena hi bhikkhave tam bhikkhum 
osårethå 'ti. |121 atha kho te ukkhittånuvattakå bhikkhd 
tam okkhittakam bhikkhom osåretvå yena ukkhepakå bhi- 
kkhü ten” upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitvà ukkhepake 
bhikkhó etad атосшр : yesmim &vuso vattbusmim sahosi 
samghassa bhandanam kalsho viggaho vivàdo samghebhedo 
samgbaråji samghevavattbånem samghan&nükarepam so eso 
bhikkhu &panno ca ukkhitto ca passi са osårito са. handa 
mayam Avuso tassa vatthussa våpasamåya samghasámaggim 
karomå "ti. atha kho te ukkhepakå bhikkbQ yena bhagavå 
ten’ upasamkamimsu, upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivå- 
detvå ekemantam nisidimeu, ekamantam nisinnå kho te 
bhikkhà bhagavantam etad avocum: te bhante ukkhitta- 
nuvattakå bbikkhü evam áhamsu: yasmim Avuso vatthus- 
mim sahosi . . . samghasåmaggim karomá 'ti. ketham nu 
kho bhante patipajjitabban ti. |11311 yato ca kho so bhi- 
kkhave bhikkhu panno са ukkhitto ca passi ca osårito са 
tena hi bbikkhave samgho tassa vatthussa vüpasamáya 
samghasdmaggim karotu. етай ca pana bhikkhave 
kåtabbå. sabbeh’ eva ekajjham eannipatitabbam gilånehi ca 
agilånehi ca, na kehici chando dåtabbo. sannipatitvå vyattena 
bhikkhuná patibalena samgho ååpetabbo: eupütu me bbante 
samgho. yasmim vattbusmim аһовї samghasss bhendanam 
kalaho viggaho vivådo samghabhedo samgharí&ji samgha- 
твта петр samghenånåkerenam во eso bhikkhu Apanno 
ca ukkhitto ca passi osårito ca. yadi eamghassa 
pattakallam samgho tassa vatthussa vüpasamáya samgha- 
såmaggim kareyya eså flatti. sunåtu me bbante esmgho. 
yasmim  vatthusmim . . . osårito ca. samgho tassa 
vatthusss- vüpassmáya samghasámaggum karoti. yasså- 
yasmato khamati tassa vatthusss vüpasamáya samghasüm- 
aggiyå Кагарат во tunh’ ass, yasss na kkhamati so 
bháseyya. kata samghena tassa vatthussa vüpasam&ya 
samghasimaggi nihatá samgharáji nibeto samghebhedo. 
khamsti eamghassa, tasmå tuphi, evam etam dhårayåmiti. 
tåvad eva uposatho kåtabbo p&timokkham uddieitabban ti. 
114181 


358 MAHAVAGGA. [X. €. 1-3. 


atha kho &yasmá U páli yens bhagavå ten’ upasamkami, 
upasamkamitvå bhagavantam abhivådetvå ekamantam nisidi, 
ekamantam nisinno kho åyasmå Upåli bhagavantam etad 
атоса: yasmim bhante vatthusmim hoti samghassa bhanda- 
nem . . . samghanün&karapam, samgho tam vatthum 
avinicchinitvà amûlå mülam gantvå samghesåmaggim ka- 
roti, dhammika nu kho så bhante samgbasåmaggiti. yas- 
mim Upåli vetthusmim hoti . . . samgho tam vatthum 
avinicchinitvá amülà mülam gantvå samghasåmaggim karoti, 
adhammikå så Upåli samghasámaggitL yasmim pane bbante 
vatthusmim hoti . . . samgho tam vatthum vinicchinitvå 
mila mülam gantvå samgbasåmaggim karoti, dhammikA no 
kho så bhante samghasåmaggiti. yasmim Upåli vatthusmim 
hoti . . . samgho tam vatthum vinicchinitva шй шат 
gautvå samghasüámaggim karoti, dnammikå så Upåli aamgha- 
såmaggiti. || 1 |] 

kati nu kho bhante samghasåmaggiyo "ti. dve "må Upåli 
samghasåmaggiyo. atth’ Upåli eamghssimagg! atthåpetå 
yyañjanupeth, atth’ Upåli samghasåmaggi atthupetå ca vyañ- 
janupetå са. katemå са Upåli samghasámaggi atthüpetà 
vyalijanupetà. yasmim Upåli vatthusmim hoti samghassa 
bhapdanam . . . samghanånåkeranam, samgho tam vatthum 
avinicchinitva amülà mülam gantvå samghasåmaggim karoti. 
ayam vuccati Upåli samghasåmaggi attbåpetå vyaüjanupetá. 
katamå са Upåli samghasåmeggi atthupetå ca vyaüjanupetà 
ca. yasmim Upåli vatthusmim hoti samghassa bhandanam 
+ .. Samghanånåkarenam, samgho tam vatthum viniochi- 
nitvà målå mülam gantvå eamghasámaggim karoti. ayam 
vucoati Upåli samghasåmaggt atthupetå ca vyafljanupetå ca. 
ima kho Upåli dve samghasåmaggiyo ti. |121 

atha kho åyasmå Upåli uttbåyåsanå ekamsam uttaråsan- 
gam karitvå yena bhegsvå ten’ afljalim papåmetvå bhaga- 
vantam gåthåye ajjhabhási : 


samghassa kiccesu ca mantanåsu ca atthesu jAtesu viniocha- 
yesu ca 

ksthampakáro idha naro mehetthiko bhikkhu katham 
hoti idha paggahåraho ’ti.| 


X.6.3.) MABAVAGGA. 359 


b 


10 


andnuvajjo patbamens silsto avekkhitácóro susamvu- 
tindriyo, 

paccattbikå na upsvadanti dhammato, na hi 'ssa tam hoti 
vadeyyum yena nam.| 

so tådiso silevisuddhiy& thito visårado hoti visayha 
bbáati, =, 

na cohambheti perisagato na vedhati, attham na håpeti 
enuyyutam bhanam,| 

tath’ eva pafiham parisåsu pucchito na o' eva pejjháyati 
ns manku hoti. А 

so kAlagntam vyåkaranåraham vaco rafijeti vifiiiparisam 
vicakkhano,| 

sagåravo vuddhataresu bhikkhusu åcerakamhi ca sake 
visårado, 

alam pametum, paguno kathetave, paccatthikånså os 
viraddhikovido,| 

paccatthikå yens vajanti niggaham mebåjano райбАрапай 
са gacchati, 

sakaü ca ådåyam syam na riñcati vy&ükaranapaüham anu- 

pagh&tikam,| 

düteyyskemmeeu alam samuggaho samghassa kiccesu ca 
éhunam yatha, 

karamvaco bhikkhugapena pesito aham karomiti na tena 
mafiilati,| 


.&pajjati yåvatakesu vatthusu, Apatti уй hoti yathå са 


тоны, 

ete vibhañgá ubhayassa sågatå, Apattivntthdnapadassa 
kovido,| 

nissáranam gacchati уйш cåcaram, nissárito hoti yathå са 
vatthunå, 

osåranan tamvusitassa jantuno etam pi jånåti vibhenga- 
kovido,| 

sagåvaro vuddhataresu bhikkhusu navesu thoresu ca 
majjhimesu ca, 

mahájaness' atthacaro ‘dha pandito, so tédiso bhikkhu 
idha pasggehåreho "ti. 131811 

Kosambakkhandhako dasamo. 


360 MAHÅVAGGA. 


tassa uddAnam : 
Kosambiyam jinavaro, vivåd” Apattidassane, 
ukkbipeyye yasmim tasmim, tassa yåpatti desaye.| 
anto simÅyam, tatth’ eva, pafic', ekafi c’ eva, sampadå, 
Pårileyyå ca, Såvatthi, Såriputto ca, Kolito,| 
Mabåkassapa-Kaccåno, Kotthito, inena ca, 
Mahåéocundo ca, Anuruddho, Revato, ре 
Anando, Råhulo с’ eva, Gotami, "nåthøpigdiko, Visåkhé 
Migåramåtå ca, 
senåsanam vivittam ca, ümisam samakam pi ca,| 
na kena chando dåtabbo, Upåli paripucchito, 
5 anupavajji visilena, shmaggi jinasåsane ’ti. 


MAHAVAGGAM SAMATTAM. 


861 


VABIOUS READINGS. 


А: India Office MS. of the Phayre Collection (Burmese 
writing). 

B: MS. of the Paris National Library, fonds Pali 17 
(Sinhelese writing). 

C: MS. of the Royal Library at Berlin, Orient. fol. 952 
(Burmese writing). 

D: Boppnacnosa's Attbakathå; MS. of the Paris Library, 
fonds Pali 39 (Sinhalese writing). Buddhaghosa omits all 
peseages, which offer no difficulties or have been explained 
before. 

E: The same work; MS. of the Berlin Royal Library, 
Orient. fol. 931 (Burmese writing). 


The division into chapters and paragraphs has been intro- 
duced by myself. 


I. 


1. 1, vimuttisukham patisamvedi A CE, vimuttisukbapati- 
samvedi BD. Comp. Jåteka, i. p. 77, 80, ed. Fausböll.— 
2, jaråmaranasokap* C at both places.— 3, yadå have ABCE, 
yadå bhave D. —jháyino B. —brahmanassa AC. The same 
spelling is constantly observed in these as in most Burmese 
MSS.— 4, For omitted words B always uses the symbol pe, 
AO have different symbols, the most frequent being la. 
This entire passage is given without abbreviation in O, which 
reads here again at both places jaråmaranasokap".— 5, jhAyino 


369 MAHÅVAGGA. [1. 1-6, 


corrected to jhåyato В. —pavediti corrected to avediti B.— 
6, C reads again at both places jarámaranasokap*.— 7, obhå- 
sayam ant? ABO. Comp. the note of М. Senart on Касс. 
i. 4, 5.— 2. 1, samadhi uttbahitvå B. —vimuttisukhap’ D, 
vimuttisukham p° ABCE.— 2, huhukajátiko A, huhumkaj° 
BODE. Buddhaghosa: so kira dittbamafigaliko mánavasena 
kodbavasens ca huhun ti karonto vicarati, taam& huhuiiksjå- 
tiko "ti vuccati. huhukkajatike ti pi pathanti. —brahmana- 
káran& A, bråhmanskåranå B, brahmanskará C.— 3, yatatto 
ACDE, yuttatto B. —bråhmanavådam B.— 3. 1, samadhi 
vutthahitvå B. —Ajepålanigrodharukkhamålå A, *nigrodha- 
måle B, °nigrodham(lé О. —Muiijalindarukkhamfle Å, Mu- 
oalindamüle B, Muñcalindamûle C. —vimuttisukham p° AC. 
— 2, sattåhavattalikå ABC, eatt&áhavadds]ikà D, sattáhavadda- 
lik& E. Comp. Jåtaka i. р. 80. —"duddini A B, *duttini O, 
*duddini D E.— 3, viddham A CD E, visuddham B. —райјв- 
liko C.— 4, asmimånassa vinayo B.— 4. 1, samådhi vutth” 
B. —vimuttsukham p° А C. — 2, tam desam gantukåmå 
addh° C. —gacchata bhegavantam B.— б, onitapettapáni 
ABC. —te ca B C.— §. 1, samadhi v? B.— 2, &layapamuditA 
and ålayapamuditåye A, àjayasamudità and ° pamuditáya В, 
°samudité and ?^semuditáya C, åleyesu sutthu mudité 'G 
álayasammudità D E. In 6 8, 9, B reads ”samuditå and 
”samuditåya, C ?ssmuditá, °samuddité and *samuditåre, 
?eamudditáya. —duddasam A, sududdasam BC. In $ 8,9, B 
reads duddasam, and thue reads C in $ 9, but sududdasam in 
$ 8.— 3, apissu A D, api sudam C. —susambuddho AC. In $8 
C reads susampuddho, $ 9 susambuddho. —patisotagåmi cor- 
rected to °gimim C, patisotegåmin ti D, patisotagåmin ti E. — 
dakkhinti D, dakkhanti A B C E.— 4, vata bho at both places 
BC, vata so at both places A; comp. Jåtaks i. p. 81.— 6, 
bhummiyam nih? C.— 7, avekkhassu AE, üvekkhassu В, 
apekkh ^CD. In $9, 10, C reads avekkh.? —dhira corrected 
to vira B.— 8, apisu tam Brahme В, api sudam me Brahme 
C; A omits this passage.— 11, * posini all MSS. —accuggamma 
ACE, ejjugg? B, abbhuggamma D, comp. Lal Vist. p. 520 
ed. Cala., where I propose to read udakátyudgatàni.— 6. 3, 4, 
Udako, Udakessa AC, Uddako, Uddakassa B. Comp. Jåtaks 


1.6] VARIOUS READINGS. 363 


i. р. 66-81; the Northern Buddhiets spell this name Rudraks 
Råmaputra.— 8, Kásinam AD, Kåsinam О, Kåsiyam В, 
Kåsinam or Kåsinam E. —endhibhütasmi А C. —åhafihi AE, 
ahambi B, åhafiei C, аһайһ D. —ematadundubhiti D (not E). 
9, yathå pi kho B. —hupeyya åvuso A, hupeyyå áv? B, 
hupeyyam åv* C, hupeyys påvuso ti Åvuso evam pi náma 
bhaveyya D E. —okampetvå AC, okappetvå (“steam cåletvå ” 
DE) BDE.— 10, åvaddho båbullåyå ti D. —paccupatbåpe- 
tabbo A B, paccuthátabbo О. —11, apissu AB, api sudam C. 
— 12, samudácarittha C. —The Jåtaka Atthakathà (i. p. 82), 
which quotes some words from this passage, offers the read- 
ing: aham bh? tathågato sammåssmbuddho.— 13, 15, cari- 
yaya B, iriyåya A, cariyåya corrected to iriyåya C.— 13, 
uttarimanusssdhemmam C, *mmå A B. —báhulliko A C, ba- 
hulikato B. — uttarim manussadhammá A, uttarimanussa- 
dhammam BC.— 15, uttarim manusssdhammå А, uttari- 
manussadhammá B, uttarimanussadbammam О; the same at 
both places.— 16, me tumhe B. —abbhåsitam A, abbbåvitam 
D, bbésitam BE. The comment explains the word: vákya- 
nádan ti. —asakkhi kho A, asanthiko corrected to asakkhi 
kho C, asakkhi ko (or: as? to?) B, as? vo D. —puna sussimsu 
A, susisum В, vacanam sussisu О. Probably we ought to read: 
puna sussåsimsu.— 17, atthakil* B.— 20, *nandini А ВО. 
27, paccañññsi A B C.— 28, рассаййазї AC.— 29, idam avoca 
. . abhinandanti is omitted in BO; in C these words have been 
inserted afterwards.— 30, ca pana bhagavaté C. —evam AC, 
etam B.— 31, devåpubbåvan ti BO. –-АййАкорјайбо (at the 
first place) B. The Jat. Atthav. (i. p. 82) and the Dhammap. 
Atth. (p. 119, 125) read Aüüükondaüüs, but the Lal. Vist. 
(p. 529 ed. Calc.) reads Ajnátakaupdinya.— 32, O almost 
constantly reads svakhyAto. —tassa åyasmato Kondañassa A. 
35, pibårabbatto iminå nihårens C, nibårabbatto A, iminå 
hårena B. —B inserts nihárabhatte, which is corrected to 
”bhatto, before tayo.— 39, vedanå bhikkhave anattå C. — 
labbhetha св vedanåyam А. —na ca labbhati vedanåyam AB. 
41, viññánam bhikkhave anattam C.— 42, kalle nu kho tam 
О.— 43, kallam nu kho tam C.— 46, evam ayam AC, evam 
asa B. The reading evam passam, which I prefer, ocours 


364 MAHÅVAGGA. 1. 6-12. 


in the corresponding passage of the Ansttalakkhanasutta as 
well es of the Cü]ar&áhulováda (Berlin MS. of the Butta- 
samgaha). Comp. also L 21. 4.— 7. 1, hetthå påsådam А, 
h° påsådå В, h° pasådå corrected to h° pasådam О. — pi niddA 
okkami A, pi pacch& niddam okkami C, pi niddA okkamati 
parijanassåpi pacchå niddam okkami B.— 2, mudingam A, 
mudigam C. —vikesikam A, vikkesikam C, vikkheaitam B. — 
vikkbelikam А С, vikkhelikam B. —аййё vippalapantiyo O. — 
santháti О. —idam upaddutam A. —idam upassatham A.— 
3, abhirühitvà B.— 6, dukkbasamudayam nirodhemaggam 
B. The same reading constantly occurs in this MS.— 7, 
catuddiså A, catudiså C, catusu diså B.— 8, AB omit idha 
nisinno. — 9, epi nu bhante A C. — 10, dakkhintiti B, 
dakkhantiti А О. The former spelling generally prevails in the 
Ceylonese MSS., the latter one in those brought from Burmah. 
— so ca loko C.— 11, vimucoi O, vimuccati Å, vimuttam 
B.— 14, labha AB, eulåbhå C. —euladdham A, eulsddham 
låbbå B, lábhisuladdham C. —sjjatanåya A C, ajja svatandya 

— B. 3, tå ca loke A B, tå ca kho loke C.— 9. 2, ime me 
bhante A, ima bhante B, ime ca kho bhaute O.— 10. 1 and 2, 
janapadå ABC. Probably we ought to read janapade, 
comp. Bårånasiysm setthánusetthinam, in the preceding 
chapter.— 2, ime me bhante AC, ime bhante B— 4, så tesam 
A, såva t? C, yåva t° B.— 11. 1, muttåham AB, muttánam- 
ham С. —manusså constantly C.'—må ekena maggens C. — 
agamittha AC, agamatthe D, &gamete corrected to Agamatta 
B. —sham bi bhikkhave B. —Senånigamo corrected to Sen&- 
ninigamo В, Senanigamo Å, Senonigamo C.— 2, bandhosi 
АВО. —mahåbandhanabendho A, Mérabandhanabaddho cor- 
rected to mahåb* C, Márabandhanabandho B. —muttobam 
B. —mahåbandhanesmutto A, Mårabandh ^ B, Mårabandh* 
oorreoted to mahåb* С. —nihato B. —bådhayissåmi A ВО; the 
true reading apparently is bandhayiss&mi.— 12. 3, pabba- 
jetum upasampådetum ti А, pabbåjethe upasampádetha B, 
and thus reads C, where it is corrected thus: pabb&jetu 
upasampádetum. D: pebbájethà tiådimhi.— 4, gacchåmtti 
C, gacchámi AB.— 13. 1, vutthavasso C.— 2, bandhosi AB, 
baddhosi corrected to bandhosi С. —Mårspåsens А B, Mára- 


I. 18-90.] VARIOUS READINGS. 365 


påsehi C. —mahåbandhansbandho A, Márabendhensbandho 
BO. —muttåham AO, muttohi B. —Mårapåsens AB, Måra- 
påsebi C. — Mårabåndhanamutto О.— 14. 1, tasmim yeva 
vanasande Å, tasmim van? В, tasmi ca van? O, —ekaasa pana 
рејёраі B. —nåhoti AB, n&hosi C. —ånttå hoti B.— 2, pari- 
eårimbå AB. —náhoti B.— 3, tam kåranam kim B. —ye 
mayam instead of yam mayam all three MSS.— 5, så va AC, 
` y8 са B.— 15. 1, В omits tesu.— 2, jetilasseva assamo С. — 
agarum and garum almost constantly О. —api cand? О. — 
vihedhesiti constantly AO. —api ca cand* C (at the second 
place). —cand*, corrected to api cand* С (at the third place). 
— 3, pariyådeyyan ti A B, pariyådiyeyyan ti C. DE: periyå- 
teyyan [pariyüdiyeyyan E] ti abhibhaveyya và vinåseyya vA. 
— 4, abhissmkháritvà AO, *kharitvå B. It ought to be 
corrected : ebhisamkháretvá, comp. i. 7. 8. —náge AB, någo 
corrected to någe С, In $ 6 all three MSS. read någe. The 
agreement of the two passages makes а correction like någena 
na vibethiyati (vihethiyissati), highly improbable. I suppose, 
that någe is a MAgadhi nominative, the occurrence of which 
may easily be accounted for in a legend founded on populer 
tradition.— 5, pariyaditva B.— 6, vibåremu С. —aggisålåyan 
ti A. —phåsukåmo va Å, ph? са BO. —vibodhesiti A C. —nam 
AO, tam B. —disvåna C. —sumånaso О, sumanaso A, suppa- 
sannamanaso В. —egy&gáre В. —vihedhiyattti C.— 7, hata A, 
hatå ca С, yåva B. —C inserta k&]à after lohitikà. —kåye A, 
kàyena B, råpakåye C.— 16. 1, upasamkemi AB, upa- 
samgami O instead of upasamkamimsu. —pi nàma mahanto 
B.— 2, upasamkami AC. —pi nåma mahanté B.— 17. 1, 
vannånipabbåbi B.— 2, vannånipabbåbi B.— 18. 1, vannåti- 
pabhåbi B.— 2, vannåtipsbbåbi B.— 19. 4, akåsiti AB, 
akAsiti C.— 20. 1, mahati all three MSS., instead of mahe- 
tim (the same in § 2, 4 and 5).— 2, A inserts pamsukulam 
before ålambitvå, in B this word is included in brackets, in 
C it is omitted. —adhivattå AB, adbivathé C (the same in 
§ б). —C inserts pamsukulam before ålambitvå. —parivi- 
sajjeyyan ti C. —parivisssjjatu ti B.— 4, upanikkhitt& A.— 
5, A inserts pamsukulam before Alambitvå. —&herahattho 
АО, arahanto B.— 6, італ gaccha B.— 9, idam kho pana 


366 MAHÅVAGGA. П. 20-29. 


Kassapa B.— 11, sugandhikam Å, gandhasampannan ti B, 
gandhasampannam rasasampannam С. —BC omit âkañ- 
khasi . . . tvam yeva tam gaņhå ti —yeva tam A (at both 
places); comp. $ 9.— 12, aggim A, aggi BC. —sakim deva 
all three MSS. (the same § 13; § 14 C reads sakid eva).— 
13, aggim B, aggi AC: —aggim A, aggi B C. —ujjalitum all 
three MSS. —aggim A, aggi BC. —ujjalitum В. —aggim ti 
AB, aggi ti О. —ujjalimsu all three MSS., instead of ujja- 
liyimsu? —aggi BC, aggim A. —ujjaliyissati A, ujjaliyati B, 
ujjaliesati C.— 14, aggim A B, aggi C. —aggim A, aggi BC. 
—aggim A, sggi BC. —vijjhapeyyantu В (at both places). — 
aggim ti A B, eggi ti C. —aggim A, aggi BO. —vijjbüyissati 
AB, vijjdyissati C.— 15, Neraüjarüya A, ° yam B C. —B omits 
umm? pi—ummujja nimujjam pi C, nimujja umujjam pi A, 
ummujja nimujjanti pi B. —abhinimmi A, abhimmini C, 
abbiniyatå corrected to abhinimmi B. —visippesu C. —yatbå 
himå (yathá pi B) mandámukhiyo nimmità ti AB, yathá 
paiicamatténi mandámukbieatáni abhinimmit ti C. —mahé- 
mand? AC, tava bahu mabåmand* B.— 16, vassi AB, 
påvassi C. —vulho AC, vuyho B. —idan nu ќув В, idha nu 
tvam A, idham (corrected to idha) nu tvam C. —ayamm 
abasmim A, ayam ahasmi C, ahamm &áham asmim B. —pavi- 
hissati A, passshissati B, ppaváhissati C. —na tv eva kho 
tvam A.— 18, ciraphatiká A, cirapatiká C, cirapatik& B. 
DE: cirapatikå ti cirapatth4ya.— 20, vuyhamáne AC, ^no 
B—taddhi A; B C omit this word.— 22, vuyhamåne all three 
MSS. —C omits saddhim.— 24, eggi C; A B omit the word. 
— 21. 1, tena carikam p° C, tena pakkåmi А B. —cakkhum 
Adittam bhikkhave sabbam ádittam В, kifici bh? sabbam &d? 
AO, instead of kiñ ca bh?.— 4, passam AC, mayam В. — 
vimuttasmim vimuttamhiti А, vimuttasmim pi vimuttam iti 
B, vimuttasmi vi vimuttamhi ti C. Comp. i. 6. 46.— 
22. 4, aggim AB, aggi О. —kissako AC, kisako BD. — 
kamittiyo AC, kåmitthiyo BD E. — yeün& all MSS. 
yaññam Jåtake i. p. 83. —cåtivadanti A, cábhiv? B, cáti 
(ti is crossed) piv? C. —уаййй ABO. —DE: ete rüpádike 
kåme itthiyo ca yaññå abhivadanti.— 5, ettheva A, etts ca В, 
ettha са C. —A omits avoca. —rasesu ca B. —ko carahi AC, 


1. 89.-34) VARIOUS READINGS. 367 


kho o° B. Buddhaghosa: atha ko (kho D) carahfti atha 
kva carahi. —anupadbikam А ВО, anupedbinam D. —anaña- 
tåbbåvi (^bhávi C) ABC. DE: jåtijaråmaranånam abbåvena 
anaiifiathAbhavim (?bhávi corrected to ?bhávim E). — 
8, okam nahutam B.— 11, dakkhanti A, dakkhinti B, 
dakkhantiti C.— 13, giyamåno A, gày° B, bhåsamåno O. — 
singinikkhesuvanpo ABC constantly ; DE: singinikkhasu- 
vanno ti singisuvanpanikkhena samanavanno. The Jåt. 
Atthakathå (i. p. 84) reads: °savanno. — After the third 
stanza B inserts a fourth one: santo santehi (sic) puråna- 
jatilehi . . . påvisi bbagavå. —dasavåso ABCE, dasåvåso 
D end the Jat. Atthakethå. —dasabhi ACE, dasabi BD 
and the Jat. Atth. It is possible, that this is an instance 
of the Instrumental ending in -bbi, which was hitherto 
known only from grammatical literature. —°parivérako A C, 
° parivàro B and the Jat. Atth.— 14, sabbadhi AC, sabbadhi 
BD and the Jat. Atth. In E the reading is illegible. — 
suddho AC, buddho B and the Jat. Atth.— 16, avidüre 
ABC (the same § 17), instead of atidüre? —eppakinnam 
BCD, abbokignam А, appåkinnem E. —appanighosam AO 
(the same $ 17). —vijanavadan ti pi patho . . . vijanapátan 
ti pi patho DE.— 17, abbokinnam A, appokinnam C, appa- 
kinnam B.— 23. 1, so itarassa åropetu ti О, so &rocetà ti 
ABD.— 2, arahattamaggesamåpannå và Å, ^maggam và 
sammápanná C, °maggapatipanno và B.— 5, paccavyattå A, 
paccabyåtbå B, paccabyatå C, paccabyathå E, paccavyathá cor- 
rected to ”vyåthå D. The comment says: pati-ava-pubba-idhåtu, 
tthavibhatti . . . patividdhattha tumhe, pattam tam tumbe- 
hiti attho. —paramasokam С. —abbhåtitam A, abantitam В, 
apbhutitam C, abbhutitam and abbhatitam D, abbhatitam E. 
— 6, kacci no A B, kiiiei nu С. —adhigatomhiti C. —adhiga- 
tositi O.— 7, arahattamaggasamåpannå và А, °maggam vå 
samåpannå B C. —10, paccavyatta A, °byatá O, уйа B. — 
paramasokam C. —abbbåtitam A, abbhatitam B C.— 24. 1, 
apalokåma A B O, instead of apalokayima or °kema.— 3, 
unhalohitam B. —dve ваһёуё B. —Kolito ca Up? B. —Velu- 
vane B. —stha nesam B. —Kolito ca Up? B.— 6, atha kho te 
tumhe im? g? paticodetha C.— 7, niyamånånam C, neyam* B. 


368 MAHÅVAGGA. [I. 25-99. 


— 25. 1, anåcariyamAnå B (instead of anovad*).— 6, dupposa- 
tåya AB, duppositåya C..—asantutthitdya Å, ssantutthatåye 
B, asantutthiyå C. —samganikåys AC, asallekhatåya В. — 
suposatåya Å, suppoeatá B, supositays C. —appicchasss BC, 
appicchatåya A.— 10, Instead of samheritabbam, samhe- 
rantena, etc, the MSS (also those of the comment) 
frequently read samgharitabbam, etc. —ussådetvå D (not 
E).— 15, I am not sure about the spelling and the deriva- 
tion of kavåtapittam ; the MSS. read °pittam aud °pitham. 
D: kavåtapithan ti kavåtefi ca pithasamghatafi ca. E: 
kavåtapittan ti k^ oa pitasamghåtef ca. The last word is 
spelt pitthas? in Minayeff’s edition of the Pátimokkha, and 
Abhidbån. 219.— 15, apassenaph? A, aphasseneph? BC. —B 
omits ntharitvå (after sallakkhetvå). —gerukap? C, geråkap* 
A, garum p° В. —colakam В (at both places). —parippositvå 
C, paripposetvå B, paribbositvå A.— 16, apassenaph? AC, 
aphassenaph? B.— 20, Buddhaghosa appears to have read: vå- 
pakåsetabbo våpakåspetabbo. —Instead of våssa BO often read 
tassa.— 21, nissayam B. The Burmese MSS. ordinarily read 
niyasam or niyassam.— 23, dhoviyethåti A, dhoveyyåti B, 
dhoviyathåti C. —kariyethati AC, kariyeyyå ti B. —The MSS. 
have rajanam as well as rejaná; the former is the correct 
reading. —paciyethåti А С, phatiyeyyå ti B. —rajeyeyyé ti B 
—rajentena B.— 24, chedátabbà AB, na chodetabbå C 
(i. 32. 3, chedåtabbå all three MSS.) —upatthåpetabbo A, 
upatthapetabbo В, upatthátabbo C.— 26. 1, uppajjeyyåtbå ti 
B, upsjjbiyethå ti, upsjjiyetbå ti A, upsjjiyetbå ti C.— 11, 
The MSS. have rajanam as well as rajanå, eee ch. 25. 23. — 
rajitabbam A, rajet” BO. —rajantena ACE, rajent* B. — 
rajetabbam AB, rajit* C. —upatthåpetabbo all three MSS. 
instead of upatthåtabbo.— 27. 2, må yittha В. —upattbå- 
petabbo B.— 3, anujånåmi bh? panåmitena khamåpetun ti 
B.— 928. 1, kiso hoti A, k? аһоаї BC. —°sandhatagatto Å 
constantly. —ko nu kho bhikkheve О, ko bh* А, ko nu kho 
B. —imam kho bhante B.— 3, saranågamanehi BC, "nsga- 
manehi A E. —tåham C, tam Å, ham corrected to nàham B. 
—upesampadam dåtum BC, upssampådetom A.— 29. 1, 
upasampannassa samanantará D (not E). —evamrüpam C. — 


I. 89-37.) VABIOUS READINGS. 369 


&yasmante AC, &yasmato B. —upaaampåditthåti AO, upa- 
sampedattháti B.— 30. 2, khiyattha AO, nikkhiyittha B. — 
no ce me A, no me ce C, no ce B.— 4, tattha te tay& yAv? В 
at the first, second, and fourth place. —nimantanabhattam С. 
— 81. 1, patikacceva AC. patigaccheva B (at both places). — 
abbirameyyam svåham A, °ууё våham В, *yya O. —jegucehå- 
mi nissayå patikulyå ti B.— 2, B omits tivaggens pi— 4, 
kaooi tvam app? A, kacoi (kiooi C) ttha app? BO. —арр° 
са mayam C.— б, tattha ayam pana C—hotiti BC, ahostti 
A, —ivam kho mogh? C. —eüam ovaditum afiamm an? O. 
— 6, paiiavanto AC constantly. —upasamkami B.— 32. 1, 
pakkamantesu B. —anAcariyé A.— 2, vassåmi B oonstantly.— 
8, upathåtabbo О, upathdpetabbo A B. Comp. i. 25. 24.— 
33. 1, uppajjiyeth& ti A, uppajjeyyåthå ti B, upajjiyetha ti О. 
—upatthåpetabbo all three MSS, instead of upatthåtabbo. 
— 36. 1, nissayam denti BO, n° dessanti A, instead of n° 
dassantiP —The end of this chapter is again specified by 
the MSS. as the end of the 6th Bhånavårs, the same having 
been the case with regard to chapter 33. The subscription 
“ Acariyavattam,” which belongs to cb. 32, is also repeated 
here.— 36. 1, cha yimhå A, cha уїтА C, cha hima B. — 
samodhånegato B.— 4, 5, param asekhene ^kkhandhena B 
constantly.— 12, &dibrahmacariyskàya AO, Adibrahmacåri- 
yakåya В, AdibrahmacariyikAydya ti D, ådibrahmacarikåyå 
ti E. —Buddhagh. explains vivecetum, without mentioning 
vivecåpeturn.— 13, ådibrahmacariyamkåyam A, "cariyikåya 
B, *cariyamkåya O.— 14, vittbårena na C, na vitthårena A, 
vitthårena B. —na suvibbattåni na sup? na suvin? О; na is 
omitted at the three places in AB; DE: ubhayani kho pan’ 
assa påt” vitth? sv? bontiti . . na suvibbattåniti . . na ns sup? 
ti . . euvinicchitáni. — supavattini CE, suppavattini AB, 
suppavatt!(ti] D. —euttaso A E, suttato BOD. The reading 
of BCD, which I have preferred, is sustained by the reading 
of all three MSS. in i. 53. 8, 13.— 15, suppavattini C, sappa- 
vattitåni В; A omits this word. —suttaso A, suttato BO.— 
37. 3, param asekhena ?*kkhandhena B constantly.— 4, Both 
readings, asekhena ”kkhandhene and asekhe °kkhandhe, 
occur in В at various places.— 11, ådibrahmacariyakåya A, 


VOL. IL. 24 


370 MAHÅVAGGA. (I. 37-40. 


°ohriyikAya B, ‘cariyikAya О. —viveoetum the MSS. (the same 
§ 12); according to i. 36. 12, 13, we should expect: vive- 
cotum viveoåpetum.— 12, üádibrehmscariyakáya A, "cári- 
kaya B, °cariyikAye O.— 13, na ubhayåni . . pàt^ vittbårens 
AC, ubheyåni . . påt* vitth® B. —na suvibh? па sup^ na 
suv? О, suvibh? sup? suy? AB. Comp. i. 36. 14. —supps- 
vattini Å, enppavattåni B, supavattini О. —suttaso A, mttato 
BC.— 14, suppavattini А О, suppavattáni B. —suttaso A, 
suttato AC. In the subscription this chapter, though it 
contains only 14 ohakka, is specified as “ chakkam eojam- 
våram.””— 38. 1, во ågato na upssampådetabbo AB, so puns 
paoohågamtvå bhikkhu upasampadam yåcanto so Agato na 
upas? О. —yo so bhikkhave AB, yo bh? аййо pi C.— 3, tena 
bhikkhave B, tena kho bh? AC. —A omite itthannåmo.— б, 
gåmam pindåya pavisati D (not E). —vesiyag® BCDB, 
vesiyüg? А. —vidhavág? AO, vidhavag® B.— 6, kikaraniyåni 
О.— 7, idam vuocati bhikkhave B. — samgbåtanikam AB, 
samgbåtaniyamgam О, samghåtaniyam, in the explanation 
samghåtanikam D, samghåtaniyam, in the explanation 
samgbåtanikam E. —evam an? kho ACE; BD omit kho.— 
8, vesiyag® AB, vesig? О. —vidhavág?^ А ВС.— 9, kikara- 
niy&ni O.— 10, samgbåtaniyam Å, samghAtaniya О, ^nikam 
B. —evam år* kho ADE, evam ár? hi B, evam år* C.— 
11, upajjháyasea mûl° B (not DE). —åveniyam AE, åveni- 

yam D, bbåveniyam O, &venikam B. —99. 1, khoyyo A, 
veyyo B, khayyå C. —upatthåpetabbo (at both places) B. — 
khoyyo A, veyyo B, khayyo О.— 4, айй° pi puriso O. —khoyyo 
A, veyyo B, khayyo О. —khoyyo А khayyo O; B omits the 
entire passage from sabbam sáp? to n&ham s? tik? ti— 5, 
somhi AB, soham О. —bhadanta O, bhaddanté A, bhikkbu 
B. —eyyà AC, ayyo B. —pabbájeyyan ti all three MSS. — 
40. 1, uccinstháti ADE, uccinathé ti B, uccinnathati C.— 
2, yuddhåtin* C. —pApafica kammam karome B. —dhamms- 
vådino B. —B omits вашяо° brahmac*, —sammacfrino A, 

samac? O, —saccav? brahmacårino eil? B.— 3, kin ti nu kho 
B. —B omita såmi. —råjabhate pabbajeyyantiti B. —vohårake 
B. —chetabbam AO, chedetabbam B, cheditabban ti E. — 
anusåsakassa B.— 4, appamattake pi B. I ought to 


I. 40-56.) VARIOUS READINGS. 871 


have preferred this reading. Comp. VI. 23. 13.— 41. 1, 
dhajabandham ABO. —dhajebandho ABCE, dhajabaddho 
D.— 42. 1, corikammam katvå О, —bandho all three MSS. 
—so tam kåram C.— 2, hapemåti B. —ebhayüvará AD, 
abhayuvarå BC— 43. 1, corikammam katvå О.— 46. 1, 
dhaniy& passitvà AC, dhatiyå tam passitvå В. dhaniyå is 
в misspelling ; it ahould be dhanik&.— 47. 1, ayyikå AO, 
såmikå D. —ayam so AC yo B (omitting aham). —nesamáti B. 
— 49. 2, Instead of urassa (gen.) we should read, perhaps, ur’ 
&msa-curo assa, though I do not think it probable, that in 
this case the o would have been elided.— 3, etha AC, evam B. 
—mayam ayyà А. —eabbe cime О.— 4, yåva vibbåyåti B. — 
C omits bhikkht before bhikkh(hi. —uhananti AO.— 5, dåra- 
kasaddo ti A, dårakassa вайо ti BC.— 6, visativ? са kho B. 
—yo upas? üputti dukkatasså ti B.— 51. 1, uttecetun ti A, 
upetthåpetun ti B, uddoyetun ti C. —kákuttepekam AE, 
°attbepakam В, °uddevakam C, kåkudepatan ti corrected 
to kAkuttepakan ti D. The comment explains this word as 
follows: yo våmabetthena latthi (sic D, yatthi E) gahetvå 
nisinno sakkoti Agatagate kåke utthåpetvå purato nikkhittam 
bhattam bhufijitum ayam К n&ma.— $$. 1, åhundarikå AO, 
4hunnakiraké or &huntAkirská B. —B omita na (before ime- 
sam) — 2, apåpuranam Å, aváp? B, apåv* C. —patisunitva A, 
patissatva В, patisutvå C. —epápurapam A, avüpür? В, 
&pápur? C.— 3, ittaro B, ittharo AC. —labucittakatAé no A, 
?cittákstà kho no C, °ttam vatå no D.— 654. 1, gacchassu 
AO, ågacohasu B.— 3, ohåretvå B. —aochådåpetvå A, *detvå 
BO.— 4, anavajjam tad eva yácámiti С. —bbavati A, bhaga- 
vati C, bhagavåti B.— 55. 1, bhagavatå sikkhåpadarn раййа- 
ttam B, bhagavatà pafifiattam AO.— 56. 1, kattha ca A, 
kattha ci B, kathafi (corr. to katthafi) са C. —j&tarüparaja- 
tapatigg® veramaniti B.— 57. 1, bhikkhü akkosati A, bhi- 
kkbunam акк B, bhikkhünam акк C.— 3, mukbedvårikam, 
mukhsdváriko А О, mukhadvårakam, °dvéragatam, ”dvårako 
B. —B omite etha bhante (before bhattam). —bhadant4 BC, 
bhaddantå A.— 58. 1, upajjhdyena anåp* B. —gavessntå A. 
—upajjháyam anåpucchå DE, upajjh4yena an? B.— 59. I, 
epalà]enti, apalåjetsbbå, apalåjeyya AC, apalål* B. —айа- 


372 MAHÅVAGGA. [L 59-74. 


pariså О.— 61. 1, moligalle B DE, moligalle A, mukalle C. 
The comment explains the word by thilassrire.— 2, imesam na 
p° A, imesam p° В, imesam pana pandaká (the last word is 
corrected to spandaké) C. —te pandake О. —sabbe abr” B. — 
tesam hatthibhandánam A.— 62. 1, porånak* O constantly. — 
aham nu kho B. —pbåtim k° A, bátik? O, pháük? DE, 
phávaro vá kátum B. —ime hi kho B. —nåsetabbo ti titthiyap” 
AB.— 63. 1, attiyati ABCE, atthiyati D.— 2, okkamesi A, 
okkami B, okkamati O.— 3, upedhávitvà AC, upatthabitvå 
B. —pabujjbitvå A, ра? C, patipucchitvé B.— 4, gacchatha 
tvam C. —atth’ pi p? C. —upavassa AC, upavasatha B. —ps- 
vattiyamåno B. —katvå A, kamitvå В, karitvå 0.— 5, methu- 
nadhammam Å. —okkamati all three MSS.— 66. 2, sach ca 
A, saco BO. (67: sach ca AB, eajje corrected to sace C). 
Buddhaghose: yam pana påliyam sacáca (sacáva D) mayan 
ti vattam, tassa sace mayan ti ayam eva attho. васе 'ti hi 
vattabbe ettha saoica (sacåva D) iti ayam nipáto vutto. 
васе ca (sace va D) icc eva và patho. tatthe sace ”ti 
sambbåvanatthe mnipåto, ca (va D) iti p&dspürepamatte. 
васе 'jja mayan (sammajja mayan D) ti pi påtho. 
tattha (tassa E) sace ajja mayan ti attho. —gayheyyàma A, 
ganheyyüma O, ganheyyåtha В (67: ganheyyåma ABC). 
arahanto ete bhikkhave bhikkhü A, arah* ete pi bh? bhikkhu 
C, arahanto ete bhikkhave B.— 67. 1, nåsetabbo ti samgh* 
A. —nas? ti lohitupp? А О.— 68. This chapter is omitted in 
B.— 70. 2, actvaram C. —naggo p? сагай A.— 3, naggo h° 
p? carati À.— 4, carati À.— 5, парро p? carati À.— 6, uaggo 
h° p? carati A.— 71. 1, galaganthim A, galågandikam C, 
galagamdikam B, galaganditi D E. —eipari O, вірагі A, sipa- 
dam B. stpaditi D, sipariti E. —parisadfisanam A, "ditsakam 
BO. *dåsano 'ü D E.— 72. 1, påpekå bhikkhu C.—2, 
lajjim và alajjim và ti A, lajji vå alajji và ti O, lajjt vë alajji 
vå ti B.— 78. 1, árocesi A, “sum О, “sum corrected to ^si B. — 
vattun ti A, vattubban ti BC (the вате § 2, 3).— 3, A omits 
bhikkbu. —BC omit yåciyamånena. Bunpmacnosa mentions 
this word.— 4, araññakena all three MSS, —sallakkhantene 
AO, °kkhentena corrected to °kkbantena B. —anissitene 
vasitum B. —A inserts tad& before tassa.— 74. 1, et seq. The 


I. 74-11. 3.) VARIOUS READINGS. 373 


MSS. generally read anusåvessati, anusåvetum, etc., instead 
of anussåvessati, eto.— 75. 1, gabbh? upas’ аһо AB, — 
gabbh* upasampanno upasampanno nu kho Å. —mhi no upas? 
B.— 76. 1, tassa antar” AC, terasa ant” B.— 2, vittbåyanti 
is explained in the Atthakatbå thus: vitthaddhagattå honti. 
— 5, attanå vå att? (at the first place) AB; attanå va att? C, 
which perhaps is right. —8, kathafi ca pana parena paro A.— 
Т, sunåsi AC, sunñsi B.— 9, suntisi ABO.— 77. 1, nissayå 
Acikkhitabbani (corrected to *bbáti) B, n° åcikkhitabbå A C. 
After these words AC insert: cattåri ca akaranty&ni Acikkhi- 
tabbåniti— 78. 1, ekako va Agacchanto A. —sgamåsi AB, 
ågamåsi O.— 3, nAma puriso pandupalåso B. —haritatthåya 
ACDE, haritattåya B.— 4, puthusilå all MSS. BuppuaonosA: 
putbusilA ti mahdsilé.— 5, mattakacohinno AC.— 79. 1, 
passissåmiti (at both places) A.— 2, passasi Å, passese C, pati- 
karobiti B. —passati А О, patikaroti B (at both places). —B 
omite puna.— 4, patinisssjjehi A, patinissajessasi О, na pati- 
nissajissasi B. I believe that we should read patinissajjAhi. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE FIRST BOOK.— 1, mahantesu B. 
—niggahánam ca påpicche A, niggahånam ca påpiccho BO. 
We ought to correct: niggahe oa påpicohånam, or 
påpicohånam ca niggahe.— 5, pemutthamicca suttante 
B.— 6, samgahanf h° A, samghåhanå h° O, samganángetu В. 
samgahanshetuP— 7, vatthum А. —åpattim A. —dukka- 
ram asamsesetum B. —nam B.— 9, Bhaddiyo Vappo B.— 10, 
vatthu B. — MårehiP (instead of Maro pi). — 11, påri- 
puppbaå ca һап AC.— 13, panimané Å, papámetam C, 
panamanå B.— 16, Instead of eko I think we ought to read 
bhato.— 18, vatthumhi А, vatthusmim В, vatthusmi ©. 
vatthum? —epalá]ena B, apa] lang AC.— 23, andhamu- 
gabadh* A, jeråndbamughabedh* B, ejjandhamugapadh? C. 
After this word A inserts ca.— 25, vivadenti AC, vivådenti 
B. —ekupajjhayena A, ekupajjhena C, ekujjbàyena B. — 27, 
samgho AC, samghe B. 


п. 


2. 1, mügasükará Å, mügasuk? C, migasok® В. Воррнл- 
Guosa reads mågastkarå.— 3. 1, táni nesam A, tani hesam 


374 MaHÅVAGGA. ш. 8-18. 


B, tåni sesam corrected to t° nesam C. —so nesam АС, ao 
tesam B.— 2, tåni nesam AC, tesam (tåni is omitted) B. — 
во ca nesam Å.— 3, BC omit the words ajj’ uposatho panna- 
raso. Comp. Minayeff’s edition of the Påtimokkhasutts, 
р. 2, line 16. —evam eva AC, evam evam В. —phåsu hoti 
(omitting ti) B.— 4, After ?adhivacanam etam B inserts: 
tena vucca, —vivarissåmi A, vipariseåmi O, viharissåmi B. — 
B omits manasikatvà. —sabbam oetaså A, s? cetaso ВО. — 
ватаппАћегёта A, saman&ráma С, samantå hardmi B. 
—avishhatacitta AC, avissåhatthacittå B. —nissAmetha A, 
nissamedha C, tisåmemas B.— 5, BuppHAGHOSA reada: ana- 
jjbåpanno vå hoti &p? và vutthito. —byahåtabbam A, bbyåhå- 
tabbam B, byåbåritabbam C.— 6, by&kareyya BC, byketo 
bhaveyya A, —evam evam В. —jånitabbam pucchatiti A, 
jånitabbå mam pucchatiti C, jånitabbam ева mam puecheyya 
B. —evarûpåya nama parisåya Å. —pi instead of vuocati B. — 
В omita samjánamáno.— 7, eamådhinem vimokkbånam C. — 
vivekånam B.— б. 2, yåvatakå ek? A. —ettåvatå sàm° hoti 
yåvatå B.— 6. 1, yåvatå ekåvåso hoti (omitting ti) B.— 
2, sammatå så simå B.— 7. 1, tiyojanikap° B. Воррнл- 
GHO8A agrees with the reading of AC.— 2, nadipåram s? C, 
Spåras* AB. Buppuacuosa: nadipårsn ti. —nadipárá s? 
C, ?páras? A, *påram s? B. —evarüpam nadip&ras? ABC.— 
B. 2, Instead of samgho samgho the MSS. as a rule have the 
word but once.— 9. 1, tadahuposathe ca В. —msyaö oamhá 
as” Å, mayaü camha as? О; B omits mayañ са. —nisinna 
O. Probebly it should be nisinno. —upossthemukham A 
constantly.— 10. 1, B omita tava. —vikåle А, vikålo B, vik&lo 
corrected to vikåle О. — 11. 1, karissstu (at the first and 
second place) B. —kareyyatu (at the third and fourth place) 
B.— 12. 1, nadim taranto A, nadt t° BO (at both places). 
Воррнлоновл : nadim (nadi E) taranto ”ti Sappiniyam n&ume 
nadim atikkamanto. —BuppRAGROsA: manam vulho (mü]ho 
D) ahositi isakam appattavu|habhávo (?mü]habbávo D) ahosi, 
. + . Vegens ågacchantam udakam amenasikaronto thero 
manam vu]ho (тапет @|ћо, which appears to be corrected to 
menavü|ho, D) ahosi, na pans vu]ho (vü]ho, corrected to 
målho, D.) —(At the second place:) manam vu]ho Å, mansvulo 


II. 18-90.) VARIOUS READINGS. 376 


С, manamhi vu]ho B.— 3, avippavåsasammuti А B. —avippa- 
våsssammuti (at the second place) AO.— 5, pathamam simå 
(simå B) samm? BC.— 19. 2, Apatti dukkatassiti ABC.— 18. 
8, savarabheyakam Å, savarabhayam С, corábhayam corrected 
to oorsbhayam В. BuDDHAGHOSA : samvarabhayan (samva- 
rabhayånakhen D) ti atavimanussabhayam.— 7, kathafi ca 
pana bhikkhave attånå vå C. —8, A omite puggalam tulsyitvå. 
— 9, sammannitabbam ABO instead of sammannitabbo (oomp. 
$ 6).— 16. 1, vatthukåmo BO, vatthurnkåmo А. I entertain 
no doubt, that the correct reading is vattukåmo.— 3, kå- 
råpemsantiti Å, kåråpentiti BO.— 5, dittbi &vik&tun A, 
ditthim pi &v? BD, dittha pi áv? О, ditthi pi åv* E— 9, 
therådhikam ABDE, therådikam О. Воррнлоновл ex- 
plains the word by therådhinam and mentions a reading 
therådheyyam.— 17. 3, The MSS. constantly read vattati, 
not vattati. —dutiyam theram, tatiyam theram B.— 18. 1, 
katimi ACE, katami D, katham B.— 3, kimvatikå AC, 
kittikå B.— 4, nasamaggens О. —gahetun A, gah? corrected 
to gåh° B, gåh* O.— 19. 1, pindáye сагап A, p? gacohanti B, 
p^ caranti gacchanti O. —firocetabboti ABO, instead of åroce- 
tabban tif —ns ssarati A, na asari ВО. —AB omit: anujå- 
nami bhikkhave bhattakåle . . . ettham &rocesum.— 20. 4, pa- 
dipetabbo ABO, instead of padipetabbam? —B omita $ 5, 6. 
— 6, па upatthápetabbo A, na upetthåpetabbam C.— 21. 1, te 
hi bhikkhave AC, te imehi bhikkhave B. —te ce AB, tejakho 
C. —gaocheyyum C, gaccheyyum се А, gaccheyyum ceva В. 
— 22. 1, sannipetatha A, sannipatitha O, sannipatittha B.— 
d&tabbo ABO; it ought to be read: dåtabbå.— 2, kålakiriyå 
B.— 4, sutto ACE, вше B, sutte D.— 23. 1, sannipatatha 
A, sannipatitha BC.— 2, kålakiriyå B.— 3, santi AC, santa B. 
— 924. 1, muficathe BC, muficetha A.— 25. 1, sannipataths 
A, “pati corrected to “patita B, *patithe O.— 26. 5, tikkannam 
A, tinpannam О, tinnam B.— 8, tippam AB, tippannam O, 
—ekako AO, еко B.— 9 and 10, adhittbåtabbo ABO instead 
of edhitth&tabbam.— 27. 4, såmanto A, såmantå BCDE. 

— 10, 13, kim nåma (or kinnåma) so Apattim all MBS. 

Correct: kam nåms so &pattim.— 13, 15, ten’ u 

ABC. ten’ upasemkamatif— 28. 1, ath’ айбе åv* bh? 


376 MAHÁVAGGA. [IL 83-111. 9. 


anågatå A B, atth' aññe, etc., C. The same readings almost 
constantly return throughout the subsequent chapters.— 7, 
(at the end of the chapter) párisuddhiupoestho kAtabbo 
(instead of pårisuddhi årocetabbå) A.— 89. (subscription) 
paücavisatiká n° the MSS. instead of paficasattatikam n^ 
(comp. iv. 11).— 94. 8, pádánam dhotam udakanissekam A, 
hedånam ha anadhotam udakanisesam О, p&dadhovanantena 
udakaniasekam В. Воррнленовл: pådånam dotdnam (dho- 
tam E) udakaniseksn (°пізвекап E) ti pådånam dhotánam 
udakanissekam. ^ bahuvacanassa ekavacanam veditabbam. 
padbånam (pådånem E) dhotánam udakaniesekan (cor- 
reoted to dhotåm ud*, D; dhotaudakanissekan E) ti vå påtho, 
pådånam dhovanaudakanisekan (”nissekan E) ti attho.— 9, 
ågacchantånam padasaddam B, ågantukånam p* AC. 

TABLE OF CONTENTE OF THE BEOOND BOOK.—vatthu chaasiti 
A, v? ca asiti B, v? asiti О.— 6, catupaficassarå A, *paflcavarå 
В, °райсараг& C. —safioioes cepi våyame AC, samoisåpi са 
våyave B. вайсїсеа cåpi våyamefP— 12, ågantuke C.— 
18, parivåsånuposatho A, pårivåssånaupoeatho B, párivasso- 
nuposatho C. 


ПІ. 


1. 1, te idha bh? D, tedha bh? E, te са bh? B, te bh’ С, te 
idh bh? corrected from te ca bh? A.— 2, 3, samkApayissanti 
А, samkáyissanti B, samkåyissanti and samkApayissanti C. 
BuppHacHosA: samkApayissantiti (eamkhápayissantiti D) 
appossukkå  nibaddhavüsam vasissanti.— 8. 1, samkå- 
yissanti B.— 4. 2, вайсіоса patikkamanti A, вайсісса åvåsam 
atikkamanti BC.— 3, upakaddhituk&mo B, ukkaddhitukAmo 
А, upakkadhitukámo C. —paneyyå B, paneyyå O, panåyyå A. 
— D. 2, gamissanti BC, &gamissanti À.— 3, aham dåyako C, 
aham hi dåyako А, ayam dåyako B. —etasmim nid? etasmim 
pakarane dh? B.— 4, sannivatto O, ?vatto A, °vattA corrected 
to °vattho В. BuppHaGHosA : sattáhasannivaddho (sattAham 
sannivatto E) kåtabbo 'ti.— 7, After ekam bhikkhom uddissa 
BC add: bhikkhunisamgham uddissa. —In the subsequent 
enumeration of edifices B omits jentågharam К° h° janté- 


III. 8-14.) VARIOUS READINGS. 377 


gharasálá k° h°, C omits the same words and also udapånasålå 
k? h°.— 8, ВС omit bhikkhunis? uddissa. —After kappiyakuti 
ко h° AB insert vaccakuti К h° (the same in § 13). Buppua- 
GHosa : bhikkhunfsamgham uddisså "ti ito pattbåya vaccakuti 
jentágharam jent&gharasál& "ti imåni tipi paribinåai. — After 
udapånesålå К° h° А adds: jantågharam k? h°, jantågbarasålå 
ке h*.— 9, BC omit guhå k* h°. —BoppHAGHOSA: puråyam 
(pure syam D) suttanto na palujjatiti (ра]° D) yåva ayam 
suttanto na palujjati na vinassati— 13, After udapånasålå 
AB add: jantágharam К° h°, jantágharasálá k° h*.— 23 and 
20, upasampannam ussukkem k^ AB.— 7. 8, bhikkhussa 
bhåtiko B, bhikkhugatiko AC. Воррнлоновл: bhikkhuge- 
tiko ti ekssmim vibåre bhikkhühi saddhim vasanakapuriso. 
— 8. 1, undriyati A, udamyati B, udriyati О. Buppaa- 
anosa: uddiyatiti (udariyatiti E) pa]ujjati. —&har&peyyum 
A, åharåpeswn B, avahåreyyum C. Bunpaacuoss: avahá- 
peyyun (°yyan E) ti Aharåpeyyum. I believe that we ought 
io read avahareyyum. The Bhikkhus are supposed to 
fetch the wood themselves, not to send for it. —dajjeyy&ham 
AC, dajy&ham B. Buppwacuoss (D): dajjdhan ti dajje aham 
(E omits this passage).— 9. 2, &visanti A, Avissanti BC.— 
ojam pi haranti pi (sic) BC, hananti pi A— 4, pindena O, 
pindakena A B.— 10. 1, vuttháti B.— 1L 3, gåvam A, gåvum 
C, gamam B.— 6, Here end in the following paragraphs the 
MSS, sometimes read asukasmim instead of smukasmim. — 
19. 1, tena gantun ti BC, tena upagantun ti A. —4, *vitapiyå 
В (only at the first place).— 5, nimpikosam A, nimbak^? B, 
nimpok? C.— 18. 1, Såvatthiyå AC, °yam B. —ebhirameyyám 
(corrected to °ууаш) aham A, °yyam paham B, *yyåmåham 
C. —kim kålam A.— 14. 1 and 4, bahum A. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE THIRD BOOK.— 2, bhikkhuga- 
tiko A, °bhatiko C, °bhatiko B.— 5, bhedaatth? A, bhedå 
atth® BC. —eusirena А. —vitaphya AO, vitabhåya B.— 
6, ajjhok&se ca yA удай A.— 7, yathåöåyens AC, yathåne- 
yona B.— 8, duvibhåtihå ca pupå B, dvihatibA ca puna A, 
dvihåtihå ca puns са C.— 9, na jayya A, na еууе O, na 
seyya B. —vatthudvarens eocharikå A, vatthuddåne antari 
kå BC. 


378 MAHÅVAGGA. [IV. 1-15. 


IV. 


1. 4, вас’ essa hoti avisayham BO, anc’ assa av? A (6 11 
assa hoti C, assa AB).— 8, bhagavantánam dassandya B.— 11, 
B omits bhikkhü.— 12, aph&sum, phásum AO, aphåsukam, 
phisukam B. —samsttasamvåsam А, eapettas? C, pamattas? B. 
— 13, samádiyitabbam A, samåditabbam O, samaharitabbam 
B.— 2. 1, The MSS. read sometimes pavårayamånesu, some- 
times ?riyamánesu.— 2, pucchito ABC instead of mucchito. 
tadamantarå A, tadanantarå C, tadantará B.— 6. 2, 3, så- 
mento ABC instead of såmantå (see ii. 27. 4). —Subscrip- 
tion at the end of ch. 11: paficasattatitikam nitthitam А, 
paficavisatikem n? О, B omits this subscription.— 14. 4, 
pårivåsikapavårapådånens А BC instead of pårivåsikasse 
pav? (comp. ii. 36. 4).— 16. 3, pavåritånam pavåranam 
thapenti BC.— 6, et веда. A constantly omits the words: 
må viggaham.—13, ditthena vå pav? thapesi AB.— 13, et 
seqq. С constantly omits the words: kinti te dittham.— 
16, aham pi na jånåmi A, aham na j° BO.— 17, samghå- 
disesam ropetvå (ropeta B) BO, yathådhammam kåråpetvå 
A.— 19, et seqq. såssa Å, svåyam О, såså, yassa, svåssa B, 
sassa E.— 23, suddhånam B.— 24, nam A, tam BO, na E.— 
17. 3, team vikkhitvå ADE, tesam &cikkhitvà С, tesam 
pucchitvå B.— 5, anuvaseyyum AC, anuvasseyyum B.— 6, 
anuvasseyyum AB, anupasseyyam C.— 7, årogo hoti all 
MSS, instead of årogo hosi. —vodissatiti A, bhedassatiti C, 
codessati B instead of codessasiti.— 8, codessatiti AB, 
codesaasiti C.— 9, &yasm& AC, åyasmantå В. —B omits gilåno. 
—årogo hoti A, агора hotha О; B omite these words. — 
Perhaps we should correct: årogo årogam åkaökhamåno 
oodessastti.— 10, samanuyufljitvå samanugåhitvå A, sam- 
anuy” samanubbåsitvå B, samanuy? samanugéáhitvà (sama- 
nuggåbitvå c. 18. 5, 6) samanubbásitvà C (the ваше c. 18. 5, 
6).— 18. 2, et seqq. pavåranås” AB, pavàranas? OE.— 
3, 4, O constantly, except at one place in $ 4, reads &game 
junbe kom*.— 4, (in the middle of the paragraph) karissati 
AG, karessima B. —uddissati A, uddississati C, uddisessåma 
B. —pavåressati all three MSS.— 6, punad evågantvå A, 
punad eva anto BC. 


V.1-2]) VARIOUS READINGS. 879 


TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOK.— 2, pavårentå- 
panåmafl ca A, pavárontá sata dve ca В, pavårento eamadveva 
O. Perhaps we should read: pavürent' åsane (comp. 
oh. 2), dve оа.— 4, cátuddasa A, catuddaså В, cAtuddaså C. 
—chandedånapavåranå A, chandadåne p? В, andadáne p° C, 
— 6, *vatthu ca bhandanam A, °vatthu bhapdanam B, *vatthu 
ditthi ca bhapdanam C.— 7, ^samgeho са А B, "samgaho C. 


V. 


1. 1, et seqq. The MSS. read: asiti ^sahassáni instead of 
asttim ”sahessåni— 2, adhippasåreyyåsi B.— 3, so vo bha- 
gavå P— 4, upasamkentáni O, ^kamantáni AB.— 5, upa- 
samkamantåni Å, ”kantåni О, ”kamåni B.— 7, no tethå 
bhagavantam B, по tathágatam bhagavantam А C.— 8, AO 
put the words satthå . . . asmi only once, —såvato pi A, eåvako 
pi B, Sågato pi C. —no tathå BC (tatbå is crossed in C). — 
After Sågatam a corrector bas added, in О: yathå.— 12, et 
seqq. Sitavene, Sitavane B, Sitevane AC.— 13, puto AD, 
phuto E, putho О, puttho B. —bhoge ca bhufijitum A, bbogå 
ca bh? BC.— 15, bhoge ca bhufijitum AC, bhogå ca bh? B. 
— 25, Gnaficappattam AC, Anaficapattam D, &nejjapp? B, 
aneficappattam E.— 27, tassa sammådhimuttassa B C. —bhi- 
kkhuno AB, tådino C. —karaniyafi ca na v? Å, kariyam na 
v? С, karaplyam na v? B.— 29, Before tassa me C inserta: 
sacáham bhante ekapalüsikam uhissati. —upåhanåsu ratto A, 
up? eatto C, up? hattho B.— 2. 1, nilakavaddhiká, eto., AE, 
°vatthika В, ^bendhik&, ?vandikA, °vandhiké О, ?vattikà D. 
Comp. Abhidbånapp. 525, 526. —kballakabandhå A, kallaka- 
bandbá and khall* B, khallakabaddh4 C D E. —putabandbå 
AB, putabeddbå D, påtabaddhå E, putabendhá and puta- 
beddhà C. —påliguptbimå and pålig* A, påligunbimå E, 
páligunthimà D, pålikunhimå and påliguntbimå O, påli- 
guntbikå B. —tulapunniké AD, tålapunnikå and tülapunnik& 
B, tülapuppiká E, tulepunniká and tülapunpiká C. — 
*vaddhikA A, "vanthiká B, °bendhikA and ?vaddhik& С, 
?beddhikà and *vattikå D, ^baddhik& and ?vaddhikA E. 
E: mendavisánsbeddhikà 'ti kannikathåne mendakasinga- 


380 MAHÁVAGGA. [V. 8-13. 


вапіћёпе vaddhe yojetvå katå. —vioohiká]ikA ADE, *tiká BC. 
— 4, uddacammap® А, nddacammap? and udac? O, otthaka- 
cammep? B. —luvakac® A, lüvakac? and luvakac? C, ujukac? 
and ulukec? B, u]ukac? D, lukac? E.— 3. 1, *upåhanå årohitvå 
AO, °nam ár? B. —upåhanå orohitvå ABO. Comp. i. 
7. 8, 5.— §. 1, init.: tam bhikkhum pariggshetvà ABC; 
probably we should correct: tam bhikkhü par^ Comp. 
vi. 11. 1. —up&hanam AC, up&hanà B.— 6. 1, upåhanam 
AO, upåhanå B.— 2, AB omit rattiyå.— 2, kendakam pi 
AC, kanthakam pi B. —kataredandan ti A, kadbAratagdan 
ti C, kattaradandan titi B.— 3, khatakhatisaddé B. —sabhå- 
кает AO, bhayak? B. Comp. бнімвот, Sept Suttas 
Раі», p. 10.— 8. 1, 2, rifichanti, riñchimanti A, ricohanti, 
racchiseanti B, rificanti, rificissanti C.— 10. 1, tam bhikkhum 
paseitvà C.— 3, påtamgin ti А, pàtañgan ti C, påtakan ti В, 
påtankiti ("kiti D) DE.— 4, gopakam BDE, gon? AO. — 
tulikap ABC, kul? D, t0l° E. —kadali* AOE, kådali* 
BD.— 7, Probably we should correct: afifiataro pi рёре- 
bhikkhu.— 8, vidhunitvé AO, vidhånitvå B— 1L 1, 
cammavaddhehi AC, cammabandhehi B. —ogumbhiyanti A, 
ogubbiyanti B, ogummiyenti D, okumpiyanti OE.— 12. 1, 
vind updhanena A, up? уш& BC.— 13. 1, Kururaghare A, 
Kuraraghare BD, Kuduraghere E, Kusaghare C. —Papa- 
take pabbate A, Papåte pabbate ODE, Pavatte tabbate B.— 
3, neva mayå AO, na ca may& B— 4, neva mayå A, na ca 
mayå B.— б, dassaniyam pásàdikam A, påsådaniyam В, 
påsådikam påsådaniyam C, pasådikam påsådaniyam E. — 
ystindriyam Å, yantindriyam В, eantindriyam, which appears 
to be corrected to yantindriyam, C, satindriyan ti jitindriyasp 
D, santandriyan ti jivitindriyam E.— 6, kanbuttarå ACD, 
kanduttarå BE. —gokandakahatà AC, gokanthakagatå and 
gokantbakahetå B, gokannåkåhatå D, gokanthakahatå E. — 
msjjbåru AC, majjáru DE, mejjh* and majj? B.— 9, tvam 
AB, tam C. —sarabhafifiemånepariyosåne Å, вагаЬһаййар° 
O, bhaññap° B.— 10, па таштай kåme C.— 11, paridaafti A, 
paridassiti B, paridissati C. paridaseiti (patid? E) paridassesi 
DE.— 12, Gsjengalam A, Kej? BC. —tato param B, t? para 
AC constantly. —Sujavati O, Ballavati A, Bellavati B. — 


ү. 18-VI. 19.] VARIOUS READINGS. 981 


Setakannikam Å, Betakappatam C, Svetakannikam B. — 
Dháünam A, Thünam B, Thunam C. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE FIFTH BOOK.— 1, ca asitisa- 
hassiasaro А С, sashassagümikissaro B.— 9, upasampáda- 
paficehi ganamganå dhuvasinå C, upasampadarn райса ganam 
dhuvansháyin& B, upasampadam pafica gapamgapá dbuva- 
sindåyanå C. 


VI. 


1 2, The MSS. almost indifferently read &h&rattam and 
?ttham (in the following chapters we find almost constantly 
khádaniyattham and bbojaniyattham).— 4, 5, bhattåochanns- 
kena A, bhatt&chandakena О, bhattachandakena and °сапів- 
kena B.— 9. 1, susumárav? C, sasukåv* A. В omits this 
word.— 1, 2, The correct spelling is nippakka instead of 
nipakke.— 8. 1, vacam В, pacam AC. —vacattham ADE, 
paccattam С, vattam B. —nisadapotan ti ACD, nisaddapoden 
ti E, nissadepodakan ti B.— 4. 1, paggavak? AC, vaggavak” 
pekkevak? B. —р Е: pakkavan ti latajati— б. 1, After 
patolapannam C inserts: nettamBlap? paggavap?*.— 6. 1, 
vilangam B, pil” AC. —pippali AC, pipphalam B.— 
gothaphalam A, gotephslam В, kothaphalam C.— 8. 1, 
eåmuddam А ВС, samuddikå "ti DE. Comp. Abhidh. 461. 
—bilam ABCE, bilüam D, which may be correct, comp. 
Abhidh. 461.— 9. 1, thullakacchábádho A, ?kaccá&bAdho B, 
”kaccå vå åb* С. Comp. viii. 17. 1.— 2, rajanipskkam AC, 
r&janánippakkam В, rajana n (and: rajananip*) ti raja- 
nakasatam E.— 10. 1, cålikehi AB, cálitehi C. —cunna- 
cålinan ti А, cunpam слеп ti BC. —dussachlinan ti AC, 
dussajálinan ti B.— 1]. 1, tam bhikkhum AB, tam bhikkhu 
C. Probably the correct reading is: tam bhikkhü. Comp. 
v. 5. 1.— 2, вагайјапат E. —tAlisam А, tålisam B, tålisi- 
сауа C. Possibly tbe true reading is kåliyam (Abhidbån. 
302).— 19. 4, pheruså hoti ABC. — ph? honti? —eala- 
kátthániyan ti A, salåkåtaniyen ti О, salåkådhårayan ti В, 
salåkodbåniyan ti yatthe salåkem odshanti tam. DE. — 
amsabaddhako A, *bandhake B, °vadhako C, °vaddhako DE. 


389 MAHÁVAOOGA. (VI. 13-16. 


—amsabaddhakam A, “bandhakam В, *vedhakam C.— 13. 1, 
muddhatelakan ti C.— 2, natthu AB, natthum C.— AGsifica 
A, åsificanti B, Asifijiyanti C. —påtum AC, haritun B. — 
vattim A, vetti BC. —dahati all three MSS. —dhumanetthan 
ti A, "nettan ti B, ?netthin ti C. —dbåmanettåni ABC. — 
amsabaddhako, "kam А B, amsavaddhako, “kam C.— 14. 1, 
atikkhittam" ACE, atipakkhittam? B D.— 2, phalakatamban 
tå B.— 4, bhesajjam BE, majjam CD, pajjam A. —eatta- 
kammam AO, satthak? B.— б, kabalikåya A, kambalikAya 
B, kappalikåya С. —kabe]ikan ti A, kabalikan ti B, pajikan 
ti O, kakhalikan ti D, pakalikan ti E. —såsspakuttens AO, 
°kundena B, °kuttena E, °kaddena D. —phositun ti A, 
positum ti O, dhovitun ti B. —kilijjittha A, kilijitthe O, 
pilicchittha B. —°eakkharikAys А В, *sakkharitåys C. 
DE: lonasakkarikaya (losakkarikAya E) ohinditun ti kbu- 
гера ohinditum (E omits the last two words).— 6, Instead 
of udåhu patiggahetabbåni I propose to read: ud? patigga- 
hápetabb&ni. — patiggaho ti kato В. kato (tato E) 
patiggahåpetabbo ‘ti sace bhimippatto patiggahetabbo, 
appattam (appetti E) pana gahetum vattati DE.— 7, 
dutthagahapeniko A, *gahaniko BD, °gahaniko CE. — 
sochakafloiyå AC, addhakafjiyA B. —acchakaficiyan ti 
AC, andakadjiyan ti B, асоһакајакап (acchakaficakan E) ti 
tandulakamattho (tandulamatto E) D E.— 15. 3, eabbetthi- 
kam A, sabbatthakam О, sambhattakam В. —ito titam C.— 
4, viganetvå О, pi ganetvå A, ganetvå В. —nivisi AC, 
nivasi B.— 5, (beginning of the paragraph) dårikå ABO, 
instead of dårak AP —The MSS. almost constantly read alam- 
0108, which I think is a misspelling caused by mAlakité. —afifle 
dårike A B, аййе dårake C. —аййе dårike ABC.— 6, pati- 
mudljå ti A, °ñc& ti C, °ñcåhi ti B. —asukasea B.— 8, sabbaso 
suvappamayo C. The reading of the Vibhenga (Nissaggiya 
23), where the same story is told, is sabbasovannamayo, 
which I think is correot.— 9, uttarimanusssdhammå AB, 
°dhammam C. Comp. v. 1. 7, 8. —kojumpe C, kolumpe A, 
kolumbe B. In the Abhidhånapp. (456) this word is spelt 
kolambo. Comp. ch. 19. 3.— 16. 1, *karanam AC, ° kåra- 
kam B. —såpiso A, sámiso C, såmiyo B. —kimatthiyå AC, 


VI. 16-%.] VARIOUS READINGS. 383 


kimitthiy& B. —thaddhanatthâya A, dhandhanstthüya B, 
bandhanattáya C. thambhanatthAyaP thaddhattåyeP 
— 2, vacce AC, vadhe B.— 17. 2, kutåyam AC, kutoyam В. 
4, 5, såmam pakkam А В, såmap* DE. C generally reads 
såmep*.— 6, såmapåko, s&mamp? B, ватАр° corrected to 
sámamp? C.— 7, ukkapindaka ADE, "piyduká B, *pindåkå 
C. —påoenti А О, paccanti B.— 8, na ahosi C, nühosi А, па 
hoti B.— 9, After khamaniyam bhegavà B inserts: yApant- 
yam bhagavé. —-na ahosi AC, na hoti B. —patiggahåpetvå 
AO, patiggshetvé B.— 18. 3, kojumpehi AC, kolambehi 
В. —åharåpeyyan ti A, åharåpessan ti B, b&rápeyyen ti 
C. —haråpetvå AC, &harápetvà B.— 4, nihatam ABO, 
tihatam D, nihatam E.— 19. 1, After påhesi B inserta: 
imam khådaniyam; before dassetvA: Sakyaputtassa.— 20. 
1, Mandåkinidahetire B.— 2, bhane (omitting tena hi) 

B. —Mandåkinidsham B. —abbáhitvà AQ, aggabitvå 
B.— 3, evam evam Andákiniyà dah&ya B.— 4, atirittam 
B.— 2L 1, uppannam В, ussannam АО. —nippettabijam 
AO, nibabbebijam B. nibbatthabijan ti (nibbettab° ti E) 
bijam nibbatthetvA (nippattetvå apanetvå E) paribhaiji- 
tabbam DE. Probably we should read nivattabtjam.— 
22. 2, so mam khv А, mamam khavåyam B, mamam khv 
corrected to so mam khv С. —tunhibbuto va B, tato va AC. 
— 8, duropayo ACDE, dürepeyo В. duropiyo?— 28. 2, 
eutthu ayya A, a° вууе В, sutbayya C. —åberissåmå "ti B. 
—evam ayyo ti В. —natthayyo B.— 3, potthanikam A, 
potthalikam B, pothanikam C. pottantkan ti (potthanikan 
ti E) mamsacchedanasatthakam vuocati DE.— 4, esåyya A, 
eseyya C, esåyyo В. —kim pana imåys B, kim pimáya A, 
kim imáye О.— 6, 7, eacohavi О. —lomo jåto B.— 7, B omits 
bhagavato mahávano.— 8, viflidpemi ti AC, vififiApesiti B 
instead of vififiåpesin ti. —paribhuüjámsham A.— 13, 
appamattakehi уі А, ”ke pi C, °kehi corrected to °ke pi B. 
Comp. i. 40. 4.— 14, sih& stham® A, siham* BC. —paripåtenti 
AB, paripådenti B.— 15, taracchü taracoham” A, taracchå 
m? C, taracoham” B. —paripátenti A, paripådenti B, pådenti 
C.— 24. 2, sdhikåni A BC instead of atitåni, comp. 6 3. 
—na ваа AB, na addassa C, instead of па addasam 


384 MAHÅVAGGA. [VI. 94-28. 


(comp. oh. 36. 6).— 2, 3, gharåvåsatto B.— 3, atitåni A, 
adbikåni O, adbittitåni B. —na assa Å, na addassam C; В 
omits addasam tam.— 4, me bhevam C, mama bh? A, 
bhavam B.— 5, patihaneti A, patiharati C, patihanti B. — 
vineti A, vinodeti BC. —åmåsam B.— 6, paradattabhojinam 
A, persdatthabhojanam BC. —anupavacchati А, anuppa- 
vacchati BC, —cápaneti A, ca vyásaneti B, ca byapaneti O. 
—sobhigyatha B, °sobhagyatam АО. —Buppuacnosa: 
patthayatam ioohitan ti (sic) padånam alam eva dåtun 
ti iminá sambendbo. васе pana patthayatha (sic) icchatà 
"ti (icchitan ti D) рафо (pi páto D) atthi so (yo D) yeva 
gahetabbo.— 25. 1, ”yåguyå và A, ”yåguyå ca B, ”yåguyå 
dhåtå O. Comp. Sanso. dhrá.— 3, pstiggephatha AB, 
patiganhitthe О. —dh&tà AC, dhitå B.— 4, na cåbam pati- 
balo BO.— 5, (at the end) haratha và. kim nu kho mayá 
bhante . . . apufitiam vå ti (omitting the repetition) A B.— 
26. 1, et seq. Belajo A, Belatto and sometimes Belattho 
BC. Comp. the name of Sañjaya Belatthiputta. — 2, Abbato 
AB, &hato C.— 5, kojumpe pi А B, kolampehi C.— ghate 
pi A, vighatebi pi О, B omits these words. —pitekåni 
pi uccange рі AO, sippåtikåni pi uttarásangam pi B.— 
7, cicithyati citioitåyati А, ciooityati oitioitáyati B, 
vicoitåyati vicitåyati O. —pbålo A, mabåphålo C, balo 
corrected to bilo В. — divasam santatto А, divasa- 
santattho О, divassyantatto B. —cicițâyati oitåcitAyati A, 
cicatayati citicitAyati B, ciocitåyati vicitàyati C.— 28. 2, 
sabbasandharisandhatam А, sabbasandberitam C, sabbattha- 
risanthatam B. DE: ssbbasandharan ti (eaddhesanthånan 
ti D) yathà eabbam eandhatam (santbåtam D) hoti evam. 
Probably we ought to correct: sabbasantharim åvasa- 
thågåram santharitv& (comp. Mahåparin. Sutta, p. 11). 
— Before Asanåni AC insert bhagavato. Comp. Mabåpari- 
nibbånas. p. 11.— 3, sabbasandharisandbatam А О, sabbå- 
eattharikam santhatam B. —purattabhimukho Å, puratthåbh* 
C, puratthimAbh® В (at both places). —purakkhetvå A, 
purekkhitvé C, purakkhetvå corrected to purekkhetvå В. — 
purakkbetvå A, purekkhatvå В, purakkhitvá C. —mahatam 
A, mahati BC. —bhojanånim A, bbojanåti В, bhogajani С. 


VI. 88-83.) VARIOUS READINGS. , 885 


7, et seq. Sunidhav* ACE, Sünidhav?^, Sunidhav*, Sunidhav? 
B, Sütidhev? D. I think that Childers’s spelling Sunidha 
is correct; comp. Sansc. Sanithe.— 10, nivesanå C, parive- 
eané B, perivesanam A.— 11, brabmecariye АО, brahma- 
chriye B. —åsum ABC. The true reading is assu, see 
Mabåparinibb. Sutta, p. 14.— 13, visajja AC, vessajja D, 
vissajja DE. —jano bandhati AC, jano pabandhanti B, jano 
pabandhati E, jato bandbeti D.— 929. 2, samsaritam AO, 
samsitam E, samhitam B. —acchinnamülam B, uccbiunam 
m? AC.— 30. 1, bhedram bhadram yinam AC, bhadram 
y? B. Оошр. Mabåpar. Sutta, p. 19.— 3, niyyåsum AB, 
niyåsisum C.— 4, kisea je Amb? amhákam d? B. —eka- 
bhettam AO, etam bh? B. —sace pi me ayy? A. —dajjdham 
tam С, dajjáham A, dejjà B.— 4, 5, Instead of ambakåya 
A BC read Ambapålikåye, but the comment shows, that the 
former reading is the correct one (Buppuaauosa : ambakåyå 
‘ti ittbiyikåya). Comp. Mahåparin. 8. p. 20.— б, adhivutto 
AC, adhivatto B— 6, Bhiinjikàv? A, Кійсік° О, Gifjak? 
В. —Ambavanam А.— 3L 1, et seq. sandhågåre AO, 
santh&ág? and satthåg* B.— Nátap? A, Nåtap* and Nathap® 
D, Nátap? C. —eamikübhisamkbáro B (at both places)— 3, 
kim panime karissanti C.— 4, diva divaså A, divå divassa В, 
diva divase C.— pattikå АВ, pattiko corrected to pattiké О. 
— 7, C omits jegucohitàya dhammam desemi. jigucchitaya 
dh? d° A, jigucchåya dh? 4° B.— 8, 9, ansbhåvam gatå B. 
— 10, anuviccakåram А BC, anuvijjakåranam D, anuviccha- 
kAranam E (anuviditvá cintetv& tulayitvå k&tabbam). —mam 
bi AC, mamam hi B. —såvakå A B, såvakam C.— 11, pinda- 
påtam BC, pindakam A (at both places).— 13, asatå AC, 
acchå B. —musåvs AC, musåvådå B.— 392. 1, et вед. 
uggabitapatiggahitakam AC, uggahitam patiggahitam, and 
uggabitekam patiggahitakam B.— 33. 1, babåråmek* 
A, båhiråk* B, åråmak* C. —áropetv& AO, åropitå B.— 
3, 4, sammutiyå k° all three MSS. The agreement of the 
MSS. here and at the following places leads me to believe 
that we must not change sammutiyå to sammatåye, but that 
sammuti is here the fem. of an adjective sammuta —Sanso. 
eåmmata.— 4, sammuti k° all three MSS, —gonisitikam A, 


VOL. OL. 26 


386 MAHÅVAGGA. М [УІ. 88-36, 


gonisitikam B, gonisådikam CE.— 5, bahi patitthüpenti A, 
babi tthapenti B, bahi våsenti C. —sammutikapp® AC, 
sammutiyå kapp? В. —gonisådikam A, goniyådikam В, 
gonisüdikam C. —sammutin ti A, sammutisan ti B, sammu- 
tiyan ti C, sammutikå nama, etc., E.— 94. 1, supabhifija- 
nakam A.— 3, supabhifijanakam AC.— б, sabbattha- 
kam mah? A, sabbatthakamah® C, sambhattamkam 
mah? B.— 6, et seq. passiseåmå ‘ti B, passåmå 'ti O, 
passissåmå 'ti and passima ’ti A.— 7, süpabhiücanakam A, 
såpabhifleåcårakam C.— 9, tena hi sunisa catur? B.— 12, 
I have written bhadram yánam abhirfhitvé; ABO 
read: bhadram bhadram y? a° Comp. ch. 30. 1,— 13, 
yathå yime AC, yathà yime corrected to yathå ime B. — 
pattikå va B.— 17, Afiguttaråmo (at both places) A. — 
lonam pi tandulam pi telam pi Å, lonam pi telam pi madhum 
pi tandulam pi B, lonam pi telam pi tandulam pi C. —After 
kbádaniyam pi A В insert bhojaniyam pi. Comp. cb. 33. 1. 
yattha bhagavantam AC, yathå mayam bh? B. —tattha is 
omitted in AC, in C it has been inserted afterwards by a 
corrector. — 18, sampådeti B, eambhávesi AC. Comp. 
vii. 1. 1.— 19, nivesanam AC, parivesanà B.— 19, 20, 
sampavåresi (and sampevåretvå) tarunena ca kbirena C; AB 
omit ca at both places.— 20, santi hi bhante D.— 21, pafica 
gorasam AC, paüca gosam В, райса gorase E. —måso 
masatthikena AC, kummåso kummásatthikena åsene 
måsatthikena B. —iminå yam ayiyassa kappiyam yam 
tam d° B, imin& ayyassa k° d? A, iminå аууваза yam 
К° tam d? C.— 95. 1, et seq. Keniyo B, Keniyo А. C 
spells the name generally Keniyo, but sometimes we find 
also the other spelling in this MS.— 1, haråpeyyan ti 
AC, yåpeyyan ti B.— 2, samihitam AO, samangitam 
B. —Atthako Vamako Våmadevo cáügirsso Bhegu Ya- 
mataggi ca Våsettho Bháradvàjo ca Kassapo Vessåmitto 
ca mantánam kattéro isayo ime rattup' B.— 6, madhu- 
kapånam A, madhup? BODE. —dákarasam AC, tåkar* E, 
sákar? B D.— 8, såvatthi all three MSS. instead of så vitthi. 
— ve jayatarn В, ve yajatam C, veya etam (ve yajatam?) A. 
36. 1, eamkaram ADE, samkåram C, samnagaram B. — 


VI. 86-VII. 1.) VARIOUS READINGS. 387 


рейса satåni ‘ssa dando A; in C assa has been inserted by а 
corrector; tassa pafica eatáni dando B.— 2, behukato ABE, 
bahukkato D, bahugstho C. —buddhe và dhamme và samghe 
vá Å. —samkaro AC, samgåro B. —райса eatáni 'ssa d° A.— 
3, mahiddhiko B. —abbippasådo B.— 4, bhagavato mettena 
cittena ph? ABC instead of bhagavatå m? c° ph*. — 
gåvim tarupav? A, gávi tarunáv? B, gåvi ќагорат° C. —eso 
Avuso B.— 6, nåddasa ABC instead of náddasam. —eá- 
kam B constantly. —néddesa А В, nádassa C instead of 
náddaaam.— 37. 3, bahum-bahum denti C, which 
possibly is the correct reading.— 4, B appears to read 
Bhuságáre. Comp. also Maháparin. Sutta, pp. 44, 45.— 6, 
moghapurisa pabbajito BC, m° pabbajite A. —pabbajitena 
A, pabbajito C, pabbajite corrected to pabbajito B.— 40. 3, 
(at the end) yAvajivikam tadahu patiggahitam BO, which is 
wrong, as the commentary shows. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE SIXTH BOOE.— 2, aficani upa- 
pisani AC, añjatim upapifijani B. —ealákatháni AC, salå- 
kodhanti B.— 3, thavikam paddhakam В, thavikaamsa- 
vaddbakam A, thapikam aüüavaddhakam C.— 6, vikåsiyam 
AB, vikåsåyam C.— 10, «ай ca dipikam A, sihabyaggha- 
dipika C, sihañ ca dipikam B. 


VII. 


I. I, et seq. Påveyyakå ACE, Påtheyyakå and Páth^ 
B, Påt* and Påth* D. Воррнланозл explains this name 
thus: Påteyya- (Påceyya* E) ratthavåsino, Påtheyya (På- 
veyyam E) nåma Kosalesu pecchimedisåbbåge rattham, 
tatthavåsino ‘ti. Comp. Turnour’s Index to the Mabb- 
vames, p. 20. — Воррнлоноѕл, after having explained 
okapungehi, adds: oghapunnehiti (opapunnehiti D) pi på- 
tho.— 2, B omits yåpaniyam bhagavå. —avivadamånå phå- 
sukam (phásu B) vassam vassimhå B C, which is wrong, as 
the commentary shows. —gacchanté A, åg* BC.— 5, (E 
here mark the readings of the Parivåra [ MS. Orient. fol 378 
of the Berlin Royal Library, fol. jh]!], which contains a 


388 MAHÄVAGGA. (УЦ. 1-18. 


similar passage, by P) ovattiyakeranamattena AE, ovattikak? 
CP, ovedhiyak® D, ovadbitakårenamattena B. —kandusak” 
A, kandukak* B, bbandupak* C, kandüsak? P, kandusakaka- 
ranamattenå ‘ti muttiya- (corrected: mutaddittiya-) patta- 
bandhanamattena D, kandusakeranamatthen4 ‘ti muddiya- 
pattabandhanamattena E. —anuvütakarapam? ACEP, anu- 
våtam* B, anuvådekaranam* D. —ovadeyyakarapamattena 
А, ovadh? C, ovaddh? B, ovatth? E, ovad? corrected to 
ovaddh? D, ovatt?^ P. The word ia explained thus: Agantu- 
kapattiropanamattena kathinaoivarato vå pattam gahetvå 
aüñasmim akathinacivare (katbinacivare D) pattdropana- 
mattena.-—eva saiichinnena AP, evasaa ochinnena В, eva 
eacchinnena C. —sammå AP, simmå О, вАшай B.— 6, på- 
panikena ACEP, apanikena D, papanikena D. —eva 
saiichinnens AP, evassa ochinnena B, eva sacchinnens C. — 
sammá АР, sammo В, simå C.— 7, saubbbårå AC, ya- 
vubbhárá В, sahubbhårå E. Р generally reads sahubbh°; 
I have met only once or twice in this MS. with the read- 
ing saubbhira.— 4. 1, et seg. А sometimes, and B 
very often, reade vippakstam civaram.— 11. 1, et seq. 
apacinayamåno Å, apacitiyamåno and apaoiniyamåno B, 
apaviláyamüno C. —$Subscription: apacinanavakam n° A, 
apacinan® n? B. С omite the subacription.— 13. 1, vesati 
AC, vassati B. . 

TABLE OF CONTENTS ОР THE SEVENTH BOOK.— 1, Páveyyakà 
AC, Patheyyaké B.— 4, ullikhi AC, ullikhå B. —opatti 
A, оран В, opathi О. —daJhakamm® B. —ánuvádiká AB, 
&nuvåriké C.— б, ovadheyyam O.— 6, saüchinnena AB, 
sacch? C.— 9, chinna? A, eacchinna? C, chinne B.— 11, 
simassa ubbbåratbambi A, simassa ubbheråtbåpi C, simåsa 
ubbhårattbami B.— 12, 14, idha B, idam AC.— 15, 
kariyam tassa Å, kayiran tassa C, karissam tassa B.— 20, 
aattasattavidbi AC, sakkasukk&viddhi B.— 21, natthi AC, 
nantiká B. —chaccá AC, chatthe B. chaccho (Sanse. 
shatgas) P— 22, AC omit the words Adaya nissimagatam.— 
23, бш AC, tini B. hetthá 'ti tinayo vidhiP— 27, 
karaniyo AB, °y& C.— 28, орасіпапё A, apavilánà C, 
&pacipe B. 


VIIL 1.] VARIOUS READINGS. 389 


VIII. 


L 1, 2, åråmåni BC instead of Arima and åråme.— 2, 
vutthåpessåmå ti A, ?^yyám& ti BC.— 3, peribåyissati B, 
bhafijissati A, sacchijjati C. —gilånå 'ti pativedeyyan ti 
ABO, gilanam pativedeyyan ti E, gilånam pativaseyyan ti 
D.— 4, jivatiti tassa Jivako В, tassa jivatiti J° С, tassa 
Jivako A.— 5, upari jivitum B.— 6, ganhati DE (at 
both places). —sutthum ca А ВС, sutthu ca DE. —sutthum 
ca AB, sutthu ca C.— 7, åhindanto åcariya C, Ahindantomhi 
ёсагіув A B. —&hindento na Кїйсї A; BC omit åhindanto.— 
8, kam tikicohámtti A, tam t° BC. —etiss& &cariya A, 
etimücariya O, еһёсагіуз B.— 10, yadå arogå ahosi AO, 
увай årogo hoti B.— 11, uttånskam В. —nipajjapetva B, 
nipåtetvå A C. —nuthuhitvà AC, nutthahitvà B.— 12, mo 
mahagghüni bhessjjåni B. —upsjånåmetassa samyamassa 
ABC.  BuppHacHosA: upanayam (upaneyam E) etassa 
samyamasså 'ti nayatassa (nayakatassa E) ca rogupasamessa 
(rogåpamasss E) ca upakdram jånåmiti adhippåyo.— 13, 
arogå thitå A, droga thitå, år” thitå, år” tit& C, årogåpitå B 
(at all three places). Comp. $ 22. —amhåkafi ceva B.— 14, 
na ciram AO, na cirasseva B.— 16, sysm kho gahapati A, 
ayam kho setthi B, ayam kho setthi gahapati C.— 17, sådhu 
deva . . . ånåpetem D, s? devo. . . åpåpetu AC. Comp. 
$ 21, 23.— 18, nipåtvo A, nipsjjåpetvå BO. —m* te 
sambandhitvå B. —ophá]etvà A, påletvå B, påtiletvå O, 
uppådetvå DE. Comp. § 22. —sippani C, sippinim А, 
sippini E, sabbini В, sibbanim D. —pånpake, pánako АО, 
pånake, páneko B. —passeyyütha В, passathayyo A, pasea- 
thayyå O. —tesåyam (at both places) B. —sibbini A, sibbinå 
В, eappani corrected to sippani O.— 19, sacåham A, saccáham 
C, sacåbam sod saccåham B.— 20, jånåsi A, jånåbiti B.— 
21,antaganhåbådho А, antånam ganthåbådho O, antagantháb^ 
B. —devo C, deva AB. Comp. $ 23. —ånåpetha A, ånåpe- 
tum B, ånåpetu C.— 22, ussåråpetvå DE. —thambhe A, 
tambhe C, tumbhe B. —ubandhitvå A, upanibandhitvå ca C. 
—uppåtetvå AC, uppàl? B. —antaganthim A, antånam ganbi 
C, antogantbikarn B. —andhaganthim A, antánar gaythi C, 


390 MAHÁVAGOA. [VTII. 1-10. 


antoganthi B. —B omits antåni patipavesetvå. —årogo thito 
AB. —војава kabåpanasahassåni adási B.— 23, In B, at some 
of the places where the king’s name occurs, he is called 
Candapejjota.— 24, tam te lopivisaratiti B instead of tam 
devo pivissatiti. —nippimceyyam Å, nipaceyyam BC. — 
піррасі A, nipaci BC. —sappirn pitam АВ. —mam ghê- 
tepessasi B, ghåtåpeyyåsi (omitting mam) Å, ghatApeyyAsi 
mam C. Comp.§ 28. ghåtåpeyyåtiP— 26, tam sappim 
A, tam sappi B, sappi C. —amanusseva patijåto B. —må 
cassa AC, massa B.— 27, bahumå passa kiilci B. —ulumpetvå 
A, olumpetvå C, odametvå B, ojumpetvå D E.— 28, khádati 
B, khádi A. —apåyi AC, pivati apåsi B. —kbådayitam AB, 
kháyitsm О. —gbåtåpeyyåsi AC, °реууаві B. ghata- 
peyyáti? —ghåtåpoyyåsi ABC. pghåtåpeyyåti? — 
siveyyakam BC, siv” and aiv? BD, siv* E. —paccárahati 
AB, paccáharati C. pacoarahatif— 31, B: nånåbhe- 
sajjehi upari bhåvetvå tathágatassa upanåmeyyan ti atha kho 
Jivako Kom? tíni upphalshettbåoi nånåbhessjjebi paribhà- 
vetvå yena bhagavå etc. —At the third place we ought to read 
virecessati instead of vireceasatiti.— 33, nhåyitu (at both 
places) A, nahayitu (at both places) В, hüáyatu and nahdyatu 
C.— 2. 1, addhakåsiyam DE.— upaddhokasinam ABO, 
”kåsinam DE. —khamamánam, khamamáno ABC, kambhå- 
nan ti (corrected to kbambhånan ti) uccávacáni sundaráni 
asunderåni ca D, khamánaen ti (omitting the following words) 
E.— 4. 1, anågamentånaem А. —sadisam A, sadishnam B, 
sadiså C.— 7. 1, After nimbakose pi A inserta ajjhokåse pi. 
— 2, sammannitabbo ABC inetead of sammannitabbam. 
— After ch. 8 poesibly another chapter is lost, which began: 
tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyá bhikkhü (P) tath’ eva 
bhandágárikem vutthápenti. See the list of contents of this 
book, v. 10.—9. 1, A omits sabbo.— 3, uttarantassa AO, 
uttaritassa B.— 10. 2, situdakåya A, situddakéya C, sttune- 
kåya B, situntikà ti apakkarsjanam vuccati E. I am 
doubtful as to the correct spelling. situnhikAya? —utta- 
rájumpam АС, uttaråjumpakam В. uttarfjavan ti vattá- 
tharakam rejanakumbhiyé majjhe thapetvA tam &tbáram 
parikkhipitvà rajanam pakkhipitum anujån&miti attho, evam 


ҮШ. 10-16.) VARIOUS READINGS. 391 


hi kate rajanam ne uttarati E.— 3, Aviiicanti A, Avajjanti 
BC. &vajjenti P? —"thálikan ti ABC, °thalakan ti E, 
*tàlakan ti D.— 11. 1, okkamitun ti AB, pakkamitun ti 
CDE. Comp. i. 25. 23.— 2, pattinam A, patthinam E, 
pattinnam D, patthinnam BC. The comment explains the 
word thus: atirajitatt& thaddham. Comp. Sansc. styána. — 
osåretun ti ABC, osádetun ti D, thapetun ti E. —dantakásá- 
våniti C; after dantakfsåvåni B inserts: ti dasadaså honti. 
— 12. 1, Megadhamehükhettam B. — acchibandham А, 
accabaddham, which at one of the places is corrected to 
&ccib? C, accibandham BE, adhibaddham D. BuppuA- 
anosa : caturassakedárabaddham. —pålibaddham, mariyåda- 
baddham, simghátakabaddham E. —aechinnabandham B. — 
passatha tumhe AC, passatu me B.— 13. 2, 5, uggate В, 
uddhate AC. Comp. Lal. Vist. p. 447, ed. Cale. —A omita 
rattiy&.— 3, 5, After dhammavinaye B inserta pabbajitå. — 14. 
1, aggalam acchádeyyan ti chinnatthåne pilotikakhandam 
(pilotikebaddham D) laggåpeyyen ti DE, —sapattam A, du- 
pattam C, dupattam B. —majjhe ekacciyan ti AC, mandele 
(corrected to mandele) kacciyan ti B.— 2, acchupantam A, 
acchupanti B, acchupentam C. —ututtbatånam A, utuddha- 
tånam B, utumbetánam (corrected to uttubbatånam) D, 
utuddhatinam CE. Buppuacuosa: ututo dighakélato 
uddhatånem (utthånam D) gatavatthakånam (*vattakånam ` 
D) pilotikånan ti vuttam hoti— 15. 4, kallskåyå AO, 
kallakåyåni B.— 6, pådå AC, pådåni B.— 7, et seq. 
The MSS. indifferently read both gamiya? and gamika®. 
—kim . . atthavasam the MSS. constantly. —А B almost 
constantly read snmphassamånå instead of sampassamAna. 
— 9, ussure all three MSS.— 10, sampamånens A, sampha- 
måne В, sampassamånens C.— 11, brahmacariyånam jinne 
A, brebmacariyam јіпоо В, brahmacårikam jikkena C. 
—jinnå bhavissanti all three MSS. instead of jinnd bha- 
vissatha. —kim .. ånisamsam the MSS. conetantly.— 
13, passambhissati AC, passaddhisati B. —passaddhamkåyå 
A, passaddhikaya B, passaddhak&yo C.— 14, atipamoditå 
AC, dadåti pamoditå B. —maccharam B. —dibbam sukham 
så labhateva Ayum B.— 16. 1, et seq. The MSS. almost 


392 MAHÄVAGGA. (VIII. 16-99. 


constantly read okkamenti (rarely okkemanti), but okka- 
mantánam (rarely okkamentánam) ; comp. okkamayato, $ 3. 
— 4, tena kho pana samayena Ayasmato Anandassa ati- 
khuddakem B. —samgopeti A— 21. 1, suttalükham AB, 
suttalukham CE, suttajukam D. BuppuaGHosa : sutteneva 
sggalam kåtun ti ettho. —okiriyanti AC, okiranti B. 
okireyyåtiti jinnakonano galati D, okiratiti chindukogato 
galati E. —atthapadakam A, atthapadaká B, atthapadikam 
C, atthapådakam D, atthåpadakam E. Воррнлоновл (E): 
atthápadakacchannena pattamukham sibbitum.— 2, anvå- 
dhikam pi åropetum is explained thus by Воррнлоновал : 
ágentukapattam dåtum. idam pena appahonake åropetabbam. 
васе pahoti dgantukapattam na vattati, chinditabbam eva.— 
22. 1, måtåpitaro hi kho A, °ro kho В, °ro pi kho 0. — 
dadamåno B C, dadamåne А. — 23. 1, idbáham В, so aham A, 
soham ©. Comp. ii. 12, 1, etc.— 24. 4, Poasibly we should 
correct anadhitthite instead of anadhitthitena; comp. 
bhájiyamáne.— 5, Isibhato A, *ddo C, *tto B.— 6, Nilavåst 
AB, Nilavåsi C. —Sånavåst A, Sálavási C; B omits the 
name of this There. —Gotako A, Gopako B, Govako C. — 
Balikesantåno A, Phalikasandano B, Phalikasandino O.— 
25. 2, In the speech of Upananda the MSS, constantly read 
agamåsi and aggabesi. There is no doubt that this is simply 
a mistake for agamdsim and aggahesim. —te pi mam 
(at the first place) all three MSS. inetead of te mam— 
26. 1, upatthahantiti A, upatthentiti C, upatthapentiti B. 
—upatthentiti AC, upatthapentiti B.— 3, upatthentiti AC, 
upatthahantiti B. —upatthentiti AC, upatthantiti B. — 
natthi te ell three MSS. Probably we ought to read: n' 
atthi vo (te and vo are very similar in Burmese writing). 
—upatthaheyyum AB, upabeyyum C.— 4, upatthåpetabbo 
Bconstantly.— 7, nihåtum A, niharitum BC.— 8, nibåtum 
AB, niharitum C.— 27. 1, upatthahemáti A, upatthapemati 
В, upatthåhemåti C.— 5, атіввајјіќат C.— 28. 1, AC omit 
hi— 2, ajinakkhipam AC constantly, sjinapekkhikam and 
ajinapakkhim B. —titthiyadhajam dhåretabbam AB, °jo 
dbáretabbo C.— 3, akkanålam AE, akkandlam B, agganå- 
lam C, ekkhanálam D. —pansdasåni and phapad? A, phala- 


VIII. $9-IX. 6.] VARIOUS READINGS. 393 


dasini O, phalakasáni and phaladestni B.— 3L 1, After 
&rocesum O adds: anuj&n&mi bhikkhave vis&sam gåhetun ti, 
TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE EIGHTH BOOK.— 2, hitatrajo 
B, hi str? AC.— 8, mahåbhiso AC, mahåbhafliio B.— 6, 
sinehati A, sinehast B, ?si O.— 11, situdi А, santutthi B, 
situnhi O.— 12, pattinnens A, pattinena В, vatthinnena C. 
— 13, aochibandbå А, avibbbatti B, avibbhanti C. —adda- 
såsi ubhandite A, addasåpi ubh° C, addasdsaii ca bhandite В. 
— 16, pacohimam A, °mo C, тепа B.— 18, punacchimsu 
A, punajjhisu B, pons dvisu C. —gilåyenå AB, gildyavå C. 
—19, egganálá са C, akkaná]i са A, ekkanálsyam B.— 21, 
*phana* A, "pana? В, °phala° C.— 22, babi BC, pahi A. 


IX. 


L.1, Воорнлоновл : tantibaddho ‘ti tasmim Avdse 
kattabbetAtantipetibeddho.— б, sddasa kho A, addasá kho 
BO. This is certainly а blunder; the true reading is 
&ddasam kho; see Kuhn, Beitråge zur Påli-Grammatik, 
p. 109. —The three MSS. read: bhante bhikkhu d? va 
Agacchante. I propose to read: bh? te bhikkhd, ete.— 6, 
adhammikena nasi dhammikena ukkhitto A, adhammikena 
si kammena ukkhitto C, adhammiko nesi kammena pi 
ukkhitto adhammikena рі dhammecakena ukkhitto B.— 8, 
vatthuamim kårapeti AC, v? kasmim kArane ti В. The 
reading of B (or: v? kismim kårane 'ti) may be correct.— 
9, vinaye AC, vinayo, B.— 3. 1, 2, Bvp»naonosa : аййа- 
тарі dhammakammam karontiti аййаїгАрї dhammakammam 
(sic) karonti ayam eva và påtho . . . afiflatråpi тіпвув- 
kammam afifistrápi satthusdeanakamman ti— 3, cha imAni 
CD, cha yimåni AE, ohemåni B.— 4. 8, anantarikassåpi 
AB, antarikassa pi С. E: ånentarikasså ti attano anantaram 
nisinnasss.— 10, 11, (at the end of the paragraph) all three 
MSS. read tam се instead of te се. —б. 1, patinisanjeté A, 
patinisajjetà C, patinissajjetà B. Воррнлоновл : patinissa- 
dethA ti (patinissajitvA ti E) petinissajjitabbá&.— 6. 1, AO 
omit bhagavantam sbhivådetvå. 


VOL. ш. 26 


394 MAHÅVAGGA. (х. 1-2. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE NINTH BOOK.— 1, icchitabbako 
AB, °ke O.— 7, atthán&rehikam А, retthånaråbikam В, 
atbånaråhikam O.— 10, уай са kammam A, paiicakammam 
BO.— 11, *upasampadå ABC.— 16, patikkhittam BC, 
^tt& A.— 17, па ca kårakam C.— 21, patikkosa A, patikosa 
BC.— 31, tsjjaniyasens оз A, tajjaniyavasona са BC. 
tajjaniyam nissayena caf— 33, paccåropeyya аййаййо 
A, pacoakkháropeypa aiiiiamafiriam C, paochå ropeyya assaililo 
B.— 84, dodotamüleken tassa A, dvedvemülakatan tassa C, 
dvedvetandulakan tassa B.— 36, All three MSS. read bhanda- 
пакдгако. — 38, cakkam bandhe P— 41, раййо AB, taficá 
C.— 44, °byAdhike AB, ^byádhite C. 


x. 


1. 10, attanå va ABC, attanå va E, attanå va and attanå 
và D. Probably attanå ‘va is the correct reading, cf. ii. 
15. 6, 7.— 2. 1, Воррнлонозл : asammodikå (^kàya D) 
vattamánáyà ti asammodikáya vattamånåya ayam eva vá på- 
tho.— 3, et seq. In the MSS. the name of the king is spelt: 
Dighiti, Dighiti, Dightti.  Dighiti is the moet frequent 
spelling, but Dighiti appears to be the correct one, as the 
name apparently is derived from iti— 3, All MSS. read ma- 
ma sbbhuyyåto. Read mamam abbhuyyáto.—ebhivijiyya 
C— 4,et seq. vammikam A, dhammikam BO constantly. 
Comp. Abhidhán. 378.— 5, avimanå A, avimano B, atta- 
mand C. —hoti AB, hotiti C, instead of hobi —6, After 
vijåyi C inserts: suvannavannam buddhalakkbanasampannam 
buddhankura (sic).— 6, et seq. In B the name of the prince 
is constantly spelt Dighåyu.— 8, Brahmadatte Kåsiraiöe A, 
оо Kåsirafifio B, *ttho Kásikaraüüo C.— 9, pilåni A, bil&ni 
BC.— 10, ciradittho B, ciram ditthå A, oiraditthà C.— 11, 
bilåni AB, khilåni С. —guppam A, kuppa C, gumbam B.— 
12, rappiye A, rammiye ©, gusimpiye B. —atha kattbåni A, 
atthe k? C, atthi k° B. —anatthako A, anattako C, anatta- 
kårako B.— 13, rodi vappam puochitvå A, roditvà khippam 
puochitvå B, roditvå dhammam peåcitvå O.— 14, AC omit 
patissutvå, — AC omit atha kho . . . etad avoca, —AO omit 


X.26) VARIOUS READINGS, 895 


paconssosi . . . Khsirañño,— 15, gamissåmå ti А, gamissámi 
C, gamiseAmiti B. —аййепа ratho O, sññeneva ratbo AB. 

—tasea . . niddam okkami all three MSS.— 16, paripådesi 
B, parimátesi C, paripå A.— 17, nibbåtetvå A, nibbåhetvå 
О, nibbápetvà B. —edrübháya А, adubhaya C, adrabhåvåys 
В.—9. 1, v. 2, ВоррнАоновл: perimutthá 'ti mutthassatino. 
våcågooarabbånino ‘ti råkårasss (rak? D) ressådeso kato. 
våcågocarå na aatipetthånådigocarå. bhånino ca, katham- 
bhånino (E adds ca). yåv icohanti mukháyáman ti yåva 
mukham pasåretum ioohanti (та pasåretvå bhånino, eko pi 
aamghegåravena mukbasamkocam na karotiti attho. —v. 3, 
yeva tam A, ye tam BDE, ye ca tam С. —upanayhanti AD, 
upaneyhenti CE, nayhanti B.— v. 6, pare na ca AC, pare 
са na B.— v. 7, atthicchinná ACE, °ochiddé B, °ochida D. 
—gavåass* B DE, gavassa° AC.— v. 9, mAtangaraüüe A, 
°rañño B, mátangam vafie О. BuppHacHosa: mátanga- 
гайдетв (°гаййо ca D) någo ‘ti mátango агаййә (rañño va D) 
någo vå.— v. 10, sahåyakå AC, *tå В. —kayiré A, kavirá C, 
kerf B. —måtafigarafifie A, °гаййо BC.—4. 1, 2, På- 
oinavamsadåyo, °уе A, Påcinavamsadåso, °уе B, Váoina- 
vamsamaggadáyo, . Påcinavamsamiggadåye C.— 2, atthak° 
AC, attak* B.— 6, et вед. Pårileyyakam CDE, РАШ° 
A, Påral* B.— 7, upetthápesi B. —ардуі А, apåsi В, 
avåsi C.— б. 1, pindapåtam B, pipdapåta C, pindakam 
A.— 2, pindapåtam B, pindakam AC.— 6, Mahåkothiko 
A, *to BC.— 12, Кабаш nu kho tebi AB, К° nu 
kho tehi tehi O, instead of: katham nu kho amhehi? 
— 6. 3, v. 1, After viniechayesu B omits ca; Buddha- 
ghosa does not mention this o&.— v. 2, anánuvajjo 
ABCE, ananuvajj D. —vadeyya уепа tam B.— v. 3, 
anuyyetam A, anuyyutam BCE, anuyuttam and anuyyutam 
D. Воронленовл explains this word thus: anuyyåtam anu- 
pakatem.— v. 4, pajjbáti B. —kálágatam A, kålåkatam E, 
kålagatam BCD. Воррнлоновл: kathetabbayuttaksle åga- 
tam.— v. 5, pametum ABD, eametum СЕ. Воррнленовл: 
vimamsitum tara tam kAranam peññáya tulayitum asmattho. 
—viraddhikovido A, visuddhikovido BC. D: visandikotiviro 
ti viddhatthánakusslo; E: visandhikovido ti virsddhe(thá- 


396 MAHÁYAGGA. VARIOUS READINGS. (re 


nakusalo.— v. 6, safifiåpanam AC, pefifiapanam В, safifio- 
janam D, paüü&penam E.— v. 7, Воронлонова : yathA 
nÅma áhunam (anuhitam D) &hutipindam samuggenhantiti. 
—v. 9, vattanå A, vattund D, vatthunå C.— v. 10, atthacaro 
idha A, ?caro va C, ° varo dha B. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE TENTH BOOK.— 2, раййекай 
cepa sampadå A, pañoekañ оета sampadá B, málakafi osvn 
vamsadå C.— 3, Kothiko А, ^to BO.— 3, Upåli cubho A, 
U* cubhayo B, Upålivhayo C.— 4, 'n&thepindiko B, ca 
Sudatto ca A, ca Budattho na са O. —AC omit Vis? Mig° 
са. —eamakam dade C.— v. 5 is wanting in AB. 


END OF VOL. I. 


ee mm —— 
STRFEEN AUNTIE AND SONG, FRINTEES, RERTPORD. 


